

--- PAGE 176 ---
Working Through and Termination
161
scious or unconscious wish to succeed with the patient and to receive the
patient’s gratitude for our help may work synergistically with the pa-
tient’s wish to defeat us (Gabbard 2000). Many therapists are drawn to
the field by a long-standing desire to establish a specific type of internal ob-
ject relationship in which they are in the role of a selfless, devoted helper
and the patient is expected to conform to a specific expectation—namely,
to make progress in the way the therapist expects and to express gratitude
for that progress (Feiner 1979; Gabbard 2000; Gorkin 1985). This much-
desired mode of relatedness may be unconsciously designed to repair old
relationships from the past in which one was not properly appreciated or
validated.
The problem with the therapist’s needs coming to the fore in this way
is that the patient may sense that in one way or another he is being used
for the therapist’s own purposes. The desire for the patient to give us sat-
isfaction in our work, however, is not simply a highly pathological goal of
a few therapists. These kinds of wishes to help are inevitable and are
present in virtually everyone in the psychotherapeutic field. Patients may
sense our need to receive gratitude for the help we offer and to have pa-
tients get better to maintain our sense of professional self-esteem. Armed
with this knowledge, a patient might take great pleasure in tormenting the
therapist by refusing to get better and maintaining a posture of total ingrat-
itude. In this way, failing in the treatment is a triumph over the therapist.
While none of us can be totally detached from the wish to help the pa-
tient, one of the obvious lessons to be learned from such impasses with
patients is that we must constantly monitor any kind of furor therapeuti-
cus (Gabbard 2000). We must recognize that ultimately the patient has
the right to resist change and even defeat the therapy if success is too threat-
ening. Rather than becoming like a cheerleader, who encourages the pa-
tient to change against all of the her wishes to do so, therapists are well
advised to systematically analyze what the patient gets out of staying ill
or dysfunctional and what pleasure may be derived from defeating the
therapist. When this fantasy is explored in depth, patients generally must
confront the notion that they are “cutting off their nose to spite their
face.” In other words, they have to come to grips with the idea that they
are really only defeating themselves when they try to thwart the therapist’s
efforts.
Therapists who can closely monitor their countertransference wish to
cure in these situations will also find that their disengagement from ex-
traordinary investment in changing the patient alters the playing field
from the patient’s perspective. When such patients see that their thera-
pists aren’t going to be devastated by their refusal to get better, they may
no longer get a “kick” out of defeating the therapist’s efforts. They must


--- PAGE 177 ---
162
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
then turn inward and look at what they are doing to themselves.
Some patients continue to deteriorate in their functioning or grow
more suicidal despite the therapist’s careful examination of countertrans-
ference issues and the self-defeating dynamics of the patient. A beginning
therapist may become desperate at such times and might be tempted to
depart from a professional role and engage the patient at a personal level
outside professional boundaries (Gabbard 2003). This choice can be di-
sastrous for both patient and therapist. A better alternative is a systematic
evaluation of the dynamics of the impasse, a reconsideration of the role of
medication (or electroconvulsive therapy), and a consultation with a senior
colleague.
A subgroup of patients who are ensconced in a negative therapeutic
reaction may be treatment failures. When the underlying dynamics of the
patient’s resistance to change are elucidated and still nothing shifts in the
process, therapists may have to consider ending the treatment or referring
the patient to someone else. These issues are fraught with countertrans-
ference pitfalls, and the decision to stop the treatment is generally best
made by consulting with one’s supervisor or another colleague about the
details of the impasse and by exploring all possible alternatives before
reaching a decision.
Termination
Termination of long-term dynamic psychotherapy is rarely as orderly and
systematic as many trainees are led to believe by the teaching of their pro-
fessors and the sections in textbooks devoted to the subject. One might
even say that something of a mythology has developed around the notion
of termination that often makes beginning therapists feel they are falling
far short of the ideal. In this mythological version, therapists and patients
come to the conclusion that the goals established at the outset have been
accomplished, transference feelings toward the therapist have been re-
solved, the intrapsychic changes have been translated into life changes,
and a specific number of weeks or months are mutually agreed on as the
“termination phase” of the process.
Such mutually satisfying terminations may occasionally occur in cases
of long-term dynamic therapy when fortune shines down on both parties
and a productive process has unfolded. However, often factors such as
time, money, relocation of either party, or disagreement about the achieve-
ment of goals interfere with a mutually endorsed termination. In the real
world of clinical practice, there is considerable variation in termination
(see Table 9–1).


--- PAGE 178 ---
Working Through and Termination
163
If the therapy is one that is time-limited to 40 or 52 sessions by design,
the therapist and patient are working toward the end point with full
knowledge from the beginning. By contrast, in open-ended long-term dy-
namic therapy, the decision to terminate will emerge only after one or
both parties begin to feel it is time, and the length of the therapy is un-
known at the outset. Some psychotherapies have forced terminations be-
cause the trainee leaves the clinic where she has been assigned or because
the patient or therapist moves to another city. Finally, there are unilateral
terminations, in which one party feels that it is time to stop, and the other
does not.
In considering the variations on termination, one begins to recognize
that the process is much messier than many textbooks or papers suggest.
Moreover, termination may not even be termination, since a large num-
ber of patients end up returning for more treatment. Sometimes the term
interruption may be more precise than termination. One study (Beck et
al. 1987) suggested that fewer than 20% of patients in community men-
tal health centers actually have a mutually negotiated termination pro-
cess. We must also accept the fact that there is a small subgroup of pa-
tients who really find it nearly impossible to terminate therapy. In his study
of patients in the Menninger Psychotherapy Research Project, Wallerstein
(1986) identified this subgroup as “therapeutic lifers.” He noted that these
patients may do well as long as they are never expected to terminate.
Some of them may be able to reduce the number of sessions to one every
3–6 months, but as long as they know they are going to continue to see
their therapist, they appear to function well. When the therapist threat-
ens termination, however, they often fall apart.
Table 9–1.
Varieties of termination
Mutual agreement of therapist and patient based on achievement 
of goals
Preplanned termination based on number of sessions
Forced termination because therapist graduates or changes clinical 
assignment
Forced termination because patient relocates
Forced termination because patient’s third-party payer discontinues 
reimbursement
Unilateral termination in which patient feels there is no value in 
continuing
Unilateral termination in which therapist feels there is no value in 
continuing (and refers patient elsewhere)
Failed attempt at termination leading to “therapeutic lifer” status
End setting as a therapeutic strategy


--- PAGE 179 ---
164
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Assessing Readiness for Termination
In long-term dynamic psychotherapy that is open-ended by design, pa-
tients are usually allowed to initiate termination when the time seems right
to them. The request for termination should be thoroughly explored with
the patient, particularly in terms of whether the goals set at the beginning
of the treatment have been accomplished. This discussion will provide
glimpses of the patient’s underlying motives for wishing to terminate. Ther-
apists need to ask themselves a series of questions: Is the patient running
from something? discouraged with psychotherapy? wanting to quit be-
cause of anger at the therapist? enacting a flight into health? As noted in
Chapter 6 (“Working With Resistance”), the first time termination is
brought up by the patient, it often serves a major resistance function.
In assessing a patient’s readiness for termination, a key variable for the
therapist to evaluate is whether the patient has sufficiently internalized
the psychotherapeutic process so that the therapist’s way of thinking and
processing feelings can be carried out independently. For example, a pa-
tient told his therapist that he was able to imagine talking to her while
she was on vacation when he got into a conflict with his mother. He thought
to himself, “What would my therapist tell me at this point about how
I am annoying my mother and making the conflict worse?” He then in-
terrupted his usual escalating cycle with his mother because of an internal
dialogue with a representation of his therapist. Patients who are unable to
use what they have learned in therapy in the absence of the therapist may
need further treatment before termination is reasonable.
A number of countertransference issues on the therapist’s part may in-
terfere with a careful assessment of the patient’s readiness to stop ther-
apy. Beginning therapists may idealize psychotherapy and have highly
perfectionist expectations of what treatment can do. They may have as-
pirations for a type of structural change or transference resolution that is
not entirely realistic. The external functioning of patients in their life set-
ting should be an index of the success of therapy, regardless of how much
internal change has taken place. Trainees may make a countertransfer-
ence error by failing to endorse a termination process because their am-
bitions for their patients are greater than those of the patients themselves.
Therapists may hold onto patients for their own needs as well. Rescue
fantasies may be at work. Certain patients may enhance the therapist’s
self-esteem in ways that make it difficult to let the patient go.
Negative countertransference feelings may also enter into a decision to
terminate. Certain patients may arouse contempt, boredom, hatred, and
anger in therapists. There may be a thoroughgoing sense of relief when
the patient speaks of terminating, and some therapists may avoid explor-


--- PAGE 180 ---
Working Through and Termination
165
ing the patient’s wish to stop as a way of getting rid of the patient.
In the case of dynamic therapies that are time-limited by design, coun-
tertransference may also enter into a decision about whether the patient
needs more therapy. If, for example, a therapy is designed to be 40 weeks
in length, beginning therapists may feel that they have failed if the pa-
tient wants more therapy after the 40 sessions because of ongoing issues
that need to be discussed. Therapists must remind themselves that patients
have their own rates of change, of overcoming resistances, and of coming
to terms with long-standing conflicts and anxieties. The patient’s internal
timetable may be quite different from the timetable of therapy as estab-
lished according to external policies.
Regardless of whether therapy is time-limited or open-ended, the is-
sue of whether one has failed is a common countertransference concern
among beginning therapists. Both patient and therapist generally begin
therapy with expectations that may be unrealistic. Patients harboring one
variation or another of the golden fantasy may hope that they have finally
found the perfect parent or parental substitute who will love them uncon-
ditionally, take care of them, and establish a perfect state of bliss. To some
degree, then, therapists must ultimately fail their patients. In other words, pa-
tients must come to terms with the limitations of what another human
being can do to gratify the longings that have been built up over a lifetime.
Similarly, therapists who are beginning their practices need to mourn the
loss of their cherished fantasies of healing others and shielding them from
anxieties, stresses, periods of dysphoria, and fundamental existential dilem-
mas. Therapists also need to mourn the limits of their profession while the
patient mourns long-held fantasies.
The Work of Termination
If the patient is in a training clinic, the work of termination often begins
with the initial contract to work together. If the therapy is viewed as a
long-term dynamic process, the patient needs to be aware of the thera-
pist’s tenure in the clinic. When therapists know they will be transferring
to a new assignment or graduating in June, the patient should be clear on
this arrangement as soon as the therapy has begun. Many trainees wish to
conceal the fact of their transience for fear that the patient will then ask
for someone else who is more permanent. Similarly, as June approaches,
many beginning therapists wish to avoid the subject of termination alto-
gether and may not remind the patient of the imminent ending of the
process. Patients may also forget the knowledge they learned at the be-
ginning, and it is helpful for the therapist to revisit the issue of the ending
of therapy periodically when it seems appropriate.


--- PAGE 181 ---
166
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Some patients do better with the annual hand-off to another trainee if
they are asked to collaborate in the process of transfer. During the last
month of the termination process, the new therapist can join the current
therapist and the patient for a session so that introductions can be made.
In the same meeting, the patient’s goals can be discussed, and the patient
can have an opportunity to ask the new therapist any questions that may
have arisen. Patients can also be asked if they have any preferences re-
garding the gender of the new therapist, the timing of the transition, and
how the transition should be conducted. This collaboration helps patients
get some sense of empowerment at a time when they may feel that they
are passively experiencing an abandonment.
Even if the therapy has reached a natural end and there is a mutually
agreed-on termination, some of the same themes appear as in forced ter-
minations. The fantasy of the ever-available therapist has to be mourned.
The reality that our relationships are ultimately transient must also be
faced. Memories of other abandonments or breakups may surface, and
the patient may have an opportunity to examine those in more detail.
A great many patients who are troubled about the termination have
difficulty verbalizing their feelings to the therapist. Often the concerns
emerge in various types of symptomatic behaviors. These must be con-
textualized as part of the reaction to termination and should not simply
be “managed.”
Ms. X, a 24-year-old woman with borderline personality disorder and bu-
limia, had been seeing Dr. Y in weekly individual therapy for 11 months.
She had completely stopped self-mutilation several months before the
initiation of termination. She had also improved greatly in her capacity to
mentalize and to think before acting impulsively. With 4 months to go be-
fore her graduation from her residency, Dr. Y decided to bring up termi-
nation with Ms. X about 10 minutes into a session. Ms. X began crying
quietly and continued off and on throughout the rest of the 40 minutes.
She said that she felt sad and couldn’t face starting with a new therapist.
She also expressed anger at Dr. Y because she felt as though her therapist
was leaving just as she was “beginning to open up.” Dr. Y felt guilty about
leaving her patient, but she was glad she had brought it up early enough
to have time to discuss it with her. She even thought about the possibility
of continuing Ms. X’s treatment in her private practice, but her supervisor
cautioned her that at such a low fee, she might end up resenting having
made the decision at a time when she was tormented by guilt.
Ms. X came to the next session and began with an announcement to
Dr. Y: “I cut myself last night.” Dr. Y silently agonized over this develop-
ment, as she had thought the self-mutilation was in the past. Again, she
began to feel guilty about what the termination was doing to her patient.
Ms. X went on to say that the cutting was prompted by visiting an old
boyfriend who was in jail. After the visit, she had called the young man


--- PAGE 182 ---
Working Through and Termination
167
on the phone and had broken up with him. She cut herself in an effort to
ease the emotional pain connected with the breakup. However, she ad-
mitted to Dr. Y that the cutting did not actually help her. She made no
link to the previous session, when she learned that she would have to ter-
minate with Dr. Y. Therefore, Dr. Y brought up the fact that the cutting
had disappeared and had reemerged only after the announcement of the
termination of the therapy. Ms. X thought for a moment and then replied
that she had had a fantasy before cutting herself that self-injury might re-
sult in her requiring hospitalization. (Ms. X had never had a psychiatric
hospitalization in the entire course of her difficulties.) When Dr. Y in-
quired what made her have such a fantasy, Ms. X responded that if she
were in the hospital, other people, such as her mother and her boyfriend,
might care more and feel responsible for her. Dr. Y noted silently that
Ms. X did not include her therapist in the group of people who might
care for her more. Ms. X did ask, however, if one of the male therapists in
the clinic whom she had seen in passing might be her new therapist.
The patient began the next session by saying she was feeling “lost.” Dr.
Y wondered with her if the feeling might relate to the upcoming termi-
nation. This time, Ms. X could acknowledge the link and became tearful.
She rapidly changed the subject, however, and asked Dr. Y her opinion
about various job options. Dr. Y pointed out how she was avoiding the topic
of termination, and Ms. X became tearful again. Quietly she offered the
following comments, “You know, they say all good things come to an end.”
After a moment of silence, she then recalled how her father had left her
mother when she was 7 years old. She then associated to her grandmother’s
death when Ms. X was 14. Finally, she brought up an emotionally painful
breakup with her first boyfriend in high school. She noted that these
losses were somewhat similar to the loss of her therapist, but she rapidly
denied being angry, saying that she recognized that it was not Dr. Y’s
choice to leave her. By the end of the session she said that she felt surpris-
ingly better after talking directly about it and crying a bit.
In this vignette, the patient expresses feelings about the loss of her
therapist through action. Often there is return of symptoms at the time
of termination, just as Ms. X began cutting herself again after many months
of good impulse control. In some ways, the return of symptoms can be
seen as a protest against the imposed loss of the therapist. Dr. Y did an
effective job of helping the patient see how the acting-out behavior was
related to unbearable feelings about losing a therapist. By helping Ms. X
to articulate those feelings, Dr. Y was also making the point to Ms. X that
the feelings could be borne even though the emotional pain did not im-
mediately go away.
Some patients don’t respond to the therapist’s interpretation of the
meaning of the behavior, however, and the therapist may need to back off
for a while. Therapists who persist in interpreting the patient’s comments
and behavior as being linked to termination may actually make matters


--- PAGE 183 ---
168
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
worse, because the patient will become insistent that there is nothing to ex-
plore. If the topic is brought up repeatedly, the patient may start to feel that
the therapist is pursuing his or her own agenda rather than the patient’s.
Termination is a time when boundaries may become a little more per-
meable. Patients may feel they have the right to ask the therapist personal
questions. Therapists who feel guilty may feel the need to take a more
personal approach and reveal more about themselves. Both patients and
therapists have difficulty with losing a significant relationship, and there
is an ever-present risk of colluding with a denial of the loss. This collusion
may take the form of planning posttermination meetings or imagining a
social relationship together. Therapists should be particularly alert to a
compromise of professional boundaries during the termination phase.
Some patients may wish to offer the therapist a small gift on the last ses-
sion, and often the therapist is well advised to graciously accept the gift,
since there would be no time to process its meaning. However, if the gift
is expensive or if its personal nature raises concerns in the therapist, he
or she may well wish to decline the gift and discuss the patient’s reaction
to their decision not to accept it. Some patients may give a spontaneous
hug to the therapist at the last session, and again the therapist has to face
the fact that if the hug is rejected, there will be no time to process it in
the future. Most therapists will simply accept the hug and wish the pa-
tient well. With patients who have a particularly erotic or erotized trans-
ference, the therapist may wish to head off such an incident by talking
about it well in advance and discussing the potential meaning of a hug in
the last session.
Some patients will ask if they can contact the therapist if they have
problems in the future. When there has been a mutual termination with
no subsequent therapist taking over the treatment, the potential for fur-
ther treatment should certainly be left open. The patient can be told that
“the door is always open.” However, if the patient is being transferred to
another therapist in a clinic setting, there is considerable potential for
splitting if the patient continues to contact the old therapist while seeing
the new therapist in person. Posttermination contact should be discour-
aged in such situations.
End Setting as a Therapeutic Strategy
At times a therapist will feel forced into arbitrarily setting an end point
for the therapy because the patient is clearly not using the therapy in a
way that is productive. Some patients may lack any motivation to work
toward goals and simply wish to use the therapist as a sounding board. A
friend can be a sounding board, and if the patient is not interested in ex-


--- PAGE 184 ---
Working Through and Termination
169
ploring unconscious motives and making changes in maladaptive pat-
terns, therapy is probably not worth the time or money. Other patients
may refuse to discuss or even think about termination despite substantial
improvement. These patients may also require the setting of an arbitrary
termination date as a way of “lighting a fire” under them. Sometimes the
certainty of the termination will focus the patient’s thinking around what
needs to be accomplished before the ending and on what the obstacles
are to working collaboratively toward termination. As noted above under
“Termination,” some patients find that they are unable to terminate ther-
apy. These “therapeutic lifers” are often not identifiable until after many
years of treatment when termination is attempted. They may begin to have
severe symptoms when termination is planned, and some even require
hospitalization. Therapists must be open to the “lifer” strategy with a
small subgroup of patients who may need to have regular contacts at reg-
ular intervals of 3, 6, or even 12 months to head off decompensation. Be-
fore this decision is made, however, therapists are advised to discuss this
strategy with a consultant or a supervisor to be sure that it is not growing
out of countertransference guilt.
Unilateral Termination
At times, therapists are forced to terminate a patient unilaterally. A pa-
tient may refuse to comply with the conditions of treatment. Limits may
have been set, such as abstinence from illegal drugs or the cessation of
phone calls in the middle of the night, and yet the patient continues to en-
gage in behaviors that compromise the treatment. Another reason to uni-
laterally terminate treatment is the patient’s refusal to pay the bill. Some-
times the therapist’s countertransference is so intense that it interferes with
the therapist’s capacity to think. In such cases there may be no other op-
tion than to transfer the patient to someone else. If the therapy reaches a
crisis of this nature, the therapist is wise to seek a consultation with a se-
nior colleague to discuss the pros and cons of ending the treatment.
Patients may also be terminated unilaterally if they refuse to come to
sessions. If the patient misses one session without calling, most therapists
would wait and see what happens at the next appointment before taking
action. If a patient who is known to be suicidal misses a scheduled session
without calling, most therapists would probably call the patient to see if the
patient was thinking of suicide or planning some kind of self-harm. How-
ever, even nonsuicidal patients who miss two consecutive sessions should
probably be called to see if they wish to continue. If the patient has a good
explanation for missing the sessions and wishes to continue, the therapist
may make allowances. If the patient does not return the calls or continues to


--- PAGE 185 ---
170
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
miss sessions, most therapists would send a letter indicating that the ther-
apy is being discontinued. In most states, it is perfectly legal to discontinue
treatment with a patient provided that suicidality or danger to others has
been carefully assessed. One provides notice of termination in writing,
and a list of other potential treaters or clinics is provided in case the pa-
tient tries to seek treatment in the future.
Summary
Working through is the systematic interpretation, observation, confronta-
tion, and clarification of repetitive patterns in the patient’s life, both inside
and outside the therapeutic relationship. In seriously disturbed patients
this process may include repeated efforts to promote mentalization by spe-
cific techniques designed to help patients see that their perceptions of oth-
ers are based on their own emotional states and internal representations.
Despite diligent efforts at working through, some therapeutic dyads will
become stuck at an impasse. These stalemates may yield to a careful ex-
amination of the transference and countertransference aspects of being
“stuck.” A subgroup of impasses may reflect a phenomenon known as neg-
ative therapeutic reaction, whereby the therapist’s attempts to help are met
with deterioration in the patient’s condition.
Termination must be collaboratively assessed according to whether or
not the patient’s goals for therapy have been achieved. Symptoms may
return at the time of termination and may be the patient’s way of ex-
pressing feelings about the ending. Some patients may dig in their heels
in the face of termination, and a variety of strategies can be considered.
References
Aron L: Working through the past—working toward the future: relational per-
spectives and working through. Contemp Psychoanal 27:81–108, 1991
Beck NC, Lambert J, Gamachei M, et al: Situational factors and behavioral self-
predictions in the identification of clients at high risk to drop out of psycho-
therapy. J Clin Psychol 43:511–520, 1987
Feiner AH: Countertransference and the anxiety of influence, in Countertransfer-
ence. Edited by Epstein L, Feiner AH. New York, Jason Aronson, 1979,
pp 108–128
Fonagy P: Attachment Theory and Psychoanalysis. New York, Other Press, 2001
Gabbard GO: On gratitude and gratification. J Am Psychoanal Assoc 48:697–
716, 2000
Gabbard GO: Miscarriages of psychoanalytic treatment with suicidal patients. Int
J Psychoanal 84:249–261, 2003


--- PAGE 186 ---
Working Through and Termination
171
Goldberg A: Between empathy and judgment. J Am Psychoanal Assoc 47:351–
365, 1999
Gorkin M: The Uses of Countertransference. Northvale, NJ, Jason Aronson, 1985
Luborsky L: Principles of Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy: A Manual for Support-
ive Expressive Treatment. New York, Basic Books, 1984
Menninger KA: Theory of Psychoanalytic Technique. New York, Basic Books,
1958
Shafer R: The Analytic Attitude. New York, Basic Books, 1983
Wallerstein R: Forty-Two Lives in Treatment. New York, Guilford, 1986


--- PAGE 187 ---
This page intentionally left blank 


--- PAGE 188 ---
173
10
Use of Supervision
Long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy occurs in a dyad but is learned
in a triad of patient-therapist-supervisor. The patient unloads painful feel-
ings and shameful memories onto the therapist and expects the therapist
to contain them. The trainee therapist, in turn, unloads the same material
on the supervisor, with the same expectation that the supervisor can han-
dle what is difficult for the therapist to manage. For beginning trainees,
supervisors are role models with whom the trainee identifies. During the
course of supervision, trainees are likely to internalize the supervisor to
the extent that they sometimes feel like they are “playing” supervisor
when they are doing therapy with their patients. Indeed, trainees eventu-
ally bring the supervisor into their offices with them as an internal repre-
sentation that guides them through difficult moments in therapy.
Individual supervision usually occurs in a once-weekly format in which
the supervisee explains what is happening in therapy to the supervisor.
Good supervisors eschew an authoritarian stance of telling the supervisee
exactly what to do (except in cases of egregious errors). Rather, they raise
questions about potential consequences of whatever intervention is con-
templated. They teach their supervisees a way of thinking about the psy-
chotherapy process that will maximize its effectiveness. In this regard,
the supervisor is more democratic than autocratic in how information is
conveyed to the supervisee (Greben and Ruskin 1994).


--- PAGE 189 ---
174
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
The Data of Supervision
The data of supervision vary from one training center to another. Some
encourage the use of videotapes. Others prefer audiotapes. Still others
use detailed process notes. Each of these approaches has various advan-
tages and disadvantages.
Videotaping of sessions has the advantage of capturing both what was
actually said in the session and the nonverbal communications of both
parties, suggesting what went unsaid. Supervisors gain a good sense of
how their supervisees actually conduct themselves with the patient and
how well they can think on their feet. The disadvantages, however, must
be carefully weighed. Ethologists know that it is difficult to examine an
animal in its natural habitat, since the presence of the observer alters the
natural habitat. Similarly, the presence of the video camera alters the fun-
damental frame of psychotherapy. What is meant to be a confidential
communication behind closed doors in the privacy of an office is opened
up to an unseen observer. Patients may consciously or unconsciously be
influenced by the presence of the video camera in such a way that they
present a filtered version of their problems to the therapist. Shameful se-
crets may be concealed, and the knowledge that someone is observing the
process may lead them to avoid painful emotional states that might em-
barrass them. Beginning therapists may be similarly inhibited by the use
of videotape. This inhibition may take the form of a greater formality or
a feeling that they must avoid spontaneity in the service of making the
“correct” interventions—those designed to win the supervisor’s approval.
Hence the videotaping of the session may have the feeling of a perfor-
mance to both parties.
Videotaping also presents other challenges. Patients may give informed
consent at the beginning of the therapy to be videotaped, but they may
secretly feel that they have little choice and that they are being coerced
into a situation where they feel their privacy is violated. If they harbor
this feeling of being exploited, they may find this experience of being
used very difficult to talk about, so that it ends up as a concealed back-
drop that affects the entire therapy. Trainees who choose to videotape
should explore the options fully with the patient and make it clear to the
patient that the taping is optional. Another drawback to videotaping is
that it may occupy so much time in the supervision that the supervisor’s
emphasis is on the details of the interaction rather than the overarching
themes in the therapy.
Audiotaping as an alternative may initially seem less intrusive, but the
same problems inherent in videotaping are present when one turns on a
tape recorder. The ethical questions are also similar. Moreover, inhibition


--- PAGE 190 ---
Use of Supervision
175
in both patient and therapist may be the same. The advantage of having
visual, nonverbal data is lost with audiotape.
Presenting process notes of sessions is probably the preferred modality
of supervision for individual long-term dynamic psychotherapy in most
training centers. The reason for this preference has a lot to do with how
“data” are defined in psychodynamic work. Psychodynamic therapists are
interested in more than the dialogue between the two parties. On the basis
of the conceptual model that psychotherapy is essentially a two-person
enterprise, supervisors in dynamic therapy want to know what is happen-
ing inside the therapist. When process notes are presented in supervision,
supervisors want to know how the therapist felt about the patient, how
the therapist thought about various interventions presented to the pa-
tient, and how the therapist experienced the patient’s response to the in-
terventions. Data, in this regard, are construed as involving the therapist’s
subjectivity and countertransference in all their various manifestations.
Did the therapist delay the beginning of the session? Did the therapist feel
bored and restless during the session? Did the therapist have difficulty end-
ing the session on time? If so, why?
One major obstacle to reporting this kind of material to one’s supervi-
sor is the supervisee’s insistence on writing down everything that was said
in the session. Some trainee therapists are so concerned that they will
leave out important data that they feel compelled to write down as close
to a verbatim transcript as they can. Excessive concern about getting the
patient’s every word on paper interferes with empathic immersion in the
patient’s experience as well as observation of the subtle transference and
countertransference enactments that arise in the course of a session. Note
taking during sessions is discouraged (see Chapter 3: “The Nuts and Bolts
of Psychotherapy”) because of this concern. Above all, therapists must be
present with their patients and be open to experiencing the affective
states that arise in the context of the therapeutic relationship.
More useful information will be presented to the supervisor if trainee
therapists make notes after the session. These notes should convey the pri-
mary themes that were discussed during the hour as well as some sample
interventions that the therapist made. The supervisory time will generally
be more productive if supervisees can begin by talking about the general
themes in the treatment and their particular struggles. For example, a su-
pervisee might come to the supervisor with the following report:
I find myself at a loss as to what I should be doing with this patient. He
occupies the entire time with accounts of external events without de-
scribing much of his inner world or what is bothering him. He generally
doesn’t allow space for me to comment on anything, and when I do, he


--- PAGE 191 ---
176
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
dismisses it. I find myself dreading the sessions each week, and I some-
times start them late because I really don’t want to go through another
tedious hour with him. When I sit there, my mind often wanders, and I’d
really like your help in trying to figure out how to break this cycle where
I feel so deskilled.
After an introduction that sets the tone of the problems in the therapy,
the supervisee can recount the details of one particular session to illus-
trate the overarching themes. By presenting the material in this way, the
supervisee also identifies a learning problem so that the supervisor can fo-
cus the supervision on helping the trainee with that particular problem.
The Supervisory Alliance
The supervisee’s vulnerability in the supervisory relationship is in many
ways similar to the patient’s vulnerability in the therapeutic relationship.
Therefore we can speak of a supervisory alliance that has much in common
with the therapeutic alliance (Lomax et al., in press). Supervisors have
multiple responsibilities that may inhibit the supervisee. They must en-
sure that the patient receives competent treatment. They are also respon-
sible for teaching the supervisee the basic skills of psychotherapy. In ad-
dition, in most training centers, they are responsible for evaluating the
trainee’s strengths and weaknesses and making a report to a training di-
rector. Supervisors have the task of creating a safe environment so that
the supervisee can be completely open in reporting the sessions. Creating
this sense of safety requires exquisite sensitivity to the trainee’s vulnera-
bility.
Lomax et al. (in press) offer several suggestions for establishing and
maintaining a supervisory alliance that is safe enough for the therapist to
reveal in a candid way what is transpiring in the therapy. Supervisors may
wish to begin a supervisory process by finding out what the supervisee
knows about psychotherapy and the nature of his or her previous train-
ing. Supervisors may also want to know about areas of difficulty the su-
pervisee has encountered in previous psychotherapy experiences. In
training experiences where the supervisee has selected the supervisor, it
may be worth exploring the supervisee’s expectations and the reasons for
choosing the particular supervisor. Both supervisor and supervisee should
be quite candid about how they conceptualize supervision and how it can
be most effectively used. Supervisors should convey to the trainee thera-
pist what kind of information would facilitate the learning process in an
optimal way. The expectations of rescheduling supervision appointments
or handling cancellations should be discussed openly. Supervisory appoint-


--- PAGE 192 ---
Use of Supervision
177
ments should have sufficient flexibility that topics unrelated to the pa-
tient can be brought in periodically. However, supervisors must also main-
tain a clear vision of what the meetings are for and must be sure that the
supervisory time is not eroded in such a way that the supervisee is de-
prived of a good learning experience.
Perhaps the most challenging aspect of supervision is facilitating an en-
vironment in which the trainee feels as though anything that happens in
the therapy can be disclosed to the supervisor. Beginning psychotherapists
typically feel an acute sense of narcissistic vulnerability as they present
their tentative efforts to behave like a psychotherapist when they’re re-
ally not sure what they’re doing. Some may deal with this vulnerability
by focusing almost entirely on the comments and behavior of the patient,
while leaving their own contributions out of the picture (Issacharoff
1984). Supervisees who are psychiatric residents may feel more comfort-
able with this medical model of reporting data that treats the patient as
a specimen rather than as part of a two-person process. Trainees who are
learning psychotherapy face a conflict between presenting what makes
them look good so they will receive a positive evaluation versus sharing
their struggles and difficulties, which may maximize the learning process
but could result in a less glowing evaluation (Greenberg 1980; Wallace and
Alonzo 1994).
Unfortunately, it is well known that supervision often involves falsifi-
cation of material, filtering or censoring of embarrassing moments, and
deliberate distortion of process notes to curry favor with the supervisor
and avoid criticism (Betcher and Zinberg 1988; Chrzanowski 1984; Han-
toot 2000). Some selection of the data in the direction of making a favor-
able impression is probably unavoidable in a situation where one is being
evaluated. However, attention to a solid supervisory alliance at the begin-
ning of the supervision can create an environment where the trainee’s
concerns about being shamed are minimized. Supervisors may, for exam-
ple, emphasize to the supervisee that they want to hear about the super-
visee’s mistakes and uncertainties because only by showing those elements
of the process can maximal learning take place. Supervisors may enhance
this possibility by emphasizing that they do not expect the trainee to be a
competent psychotherapist at this stage of training. Moreover, if they un-
derscore that the evaluation is based to a large extent on the student’s ca-
pacity to openly share struggles and process them with the supervisor
rather than giving a perfect performance, the supervisor’s values will be
made more apparent and will put the supervisee’s mind at rest about any
excessive expectations.
Supervisees will go through their professional lives seeking out consul-
tations from colleagues long after they are out of training. Open sharing


--- PAGE 193 ---
178
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
about struggles they experience with their patients maximizes the learn-
ing process. It also goes a long way toward preventing serious boundary
violations when they are tempted to deviate from the usual practices of
psychotherapists. In this regard, two basic axioms should always be re-
membered by beginning therapists (Gabbard 1996):
1. If there is anything that you are doing with a patient that cannot be
shared with a supervisor or consultant, you may be starting a danger-
ous descent down the slippery slope of boundary violations.
2. The thing you most wish to avoid sharing in supervision is probably
the most important issue to discuss with your supervisor.
When supervisor and supervisee are negotiating the parameters of su-
pervision, the supervisor may wish to have the supervisee describe the
frame of treatment. That way, the supervisor knows what sort of devia-
tions are occurring from the usual professional boundaries and the ther-
apist’s rationale for those deviations (Gabbard 2000; Waldinger 1994).
Supervisees who are extending sessions to 60 or 65 minutes instead of 45
or 50 can explain why they feel compelled to draw out the end of the ses-
sion. Those who are not charging a fee or are not insisting on collecting
the payment from the patient also can explain what they are doing. This
approach allows them to get help with any countertransference concerns
that may prevent them from setting appropriate boundaries with pa-
tients.
Boundary Issues in Supervision
The discussion of what the supervisee discloses in supervision touches on
the broader issue of the boundaries inherent in the supervisor-supervisee
relationship. The obvious boundaries are those associated with a fidu-
ciary relationship. Most mental health professional organizations, for ex-
ample, specifically prohibit sexual relationships between a supervisor
and a supervisee. Supervisees are expecting a specific service from their
supervisors that should not be contaminated by personal agendas of the su-
pervisor. The more complicated boundary, however, is one involving the
interface of treating and teaching (Gabbard and Lester 2003). In an era in
which the emphasis on a two-person psychology makes it imperative for
supervisees to share a good deal about themselves, supervisors must be
vigilant about not crossing the line from being a teacher or supervisor to
being a therapist to the supervisee. When a supervisee discloses an error,
such as prematurely interpreting transference before it has become close


--- PAGE 194 ---
Use of Supervision
179
enough to the patient’s conscious awareness to be meaningful, the super-
visor can point out the mistake, considering it as simply a matter of teach-
ing about psychotherapy. However, when a problem in technique clearly
grows out of countertransference issues, the supervisor may struggle over
whether or not to point out the therapist’s personal involvement with the
patient, knowing that there is no contract for therapy inherent in super-
vision.
A general understanding can be negotiated between supervisor and su-
pervisee about the usefulness of including countertransference within the
purview of supervision. Nevertheless, the exact boundaries of counter-
transference are hard to delineate in an abstract sense. When supervisees
are struggling with the heat of transference-countertransference enact-
ments, the boundaries between supervision and therapy may become
blurred.
Supervisees may help maintain a reasonable boundary between edu-
cation and therapy by sharing their here-and-now responses to the pa-
tient without going into great detail about their personal problems and
their childhood origins. Supervisors can facilitate an intact boundary by
focusing on countertransference in the broad sense of what the patient is
inducing in the therapist rather than focusing on how the therapist’s past
is being recreated in the present with the patient. In other words, super-
visors do not make interpretations of the childhood origins of the thera-
pist’s countertransference (Gabbard and Lester 2003). In this way, super-
visors identify countertransference as being emblematic of the sort of
interpersonal problems the patient experiences outside the therapy. They
do not label the therapist’s personal conflicts as the primary cause of the
countertransference that emerges. This understanding about how counter-
transference will be discussed in supervision may help the supervisory al-
liance in that the supervisee will feel more comfortable and safe in dis-
closing emotional reactions to the patient. Education about countertrans-
ference and its ubiquity and acceptability may go a long way toward fa-
cilitating disclosures from the supervisee. Supervisors must avoid any
implication of criticism or “catching” the therapist’s countertransference
as though it is something to be scrupulously avoided. In the past, counter-
transference was regarded as only an interference, something that could
be eliminated if one had an in-depth personal analysis. We no longer view
countertransference in that way, and the pejorative connotation should
be eliminated from the discourse of supervision.
As noted in Chapter 8 (“Identifying and Working With Countertrans-
ference”), countertransference is often entirely unconscious and is dis-
cerned only through various kinds of enactment. The supervision process
itself may serve as a fertile field for the hidden countertransferences to


--- PAGE 195 ---
180
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
emerge. Supervisees, in conveying the process of the therapy to the su-
pervisor, may begin to relate to the supervisor in the same way the patient
relates to them. This phenomenon is often referred in the literature as
parallel process (Doehrman 1976; Gabbard and Lester 2003; Gediman
and Wolkenfeld 1980). The mechanism of parallel process is not signifi-
cantly different from the mechanism of enactment. Just as patients may
repeat in action what they resist remembering, so may supervisees enact
rather than verbalize something from the therapy. Through these reen-
actments, the therapist may unconsciously identify with the patient and
replicate an aspect of the transference with the supervisor. Moreover, when
the supervisee begins to treat the supervisor as the patient treats the ther-
apist, then the supervisor may start to experience countertransference
similar to that of the therapist. A clinical example illustrates this phe-
nomenon:
Dr. Z was growing frustrated in her supervision with Dr. AA. She felt
she was having a great deal of difficulty making useful and effective ther-
apeutic interventions with her patient. Week after week she would
describe the patient and point out how elusive he was when she tried
to get him to focus on specific conflicts that he wanted to address in ther-
apy. The patient preferred to speak in abstract and metaphysical terms
rather than talking about specific changes he would like to make in his
life. Dr. Z would develop a number of formulations with her supervisor
that were designed to focus the material, but none of them seemed to fit
the patient’s experience. For example, Dr. Z said at one point, “Is it pos-
sible you would prefer not to focus on any goals because the idea of
change is frightening to you? The patient responded, “No, I don’t think
so. I feel really miserable most of the time, so I would really like to change
things.”
When this line of interpretation was unsuccessful, Dr. AA suggested
another strategy to Dr. Z: Was it possible that the patient was invested in
defeating Dr. Z because it made him feel bad about himself to take help
from Dr. Z? When Dr. Z tried out this strategy with the patient, he re-
sponded negatively again, emphasizing that he really wanted help from
Dr. Z and really did not want to defeat her.
This pattern of offering suggestions occurred repetitively, both in the
therapy and in the supervision. Eventually, Dr. AA began to appreciate
how helpless and impotent that Dr. Z was feeling in the therapy because
he felt that way in the supervision. He asked Dr. Z if she were feeling
helpless. Dr. Z confirmed, saying that she was feeling like nothing she said
made a difference to the patient, and she was wondering if she were fail-
ing as a therapist. Dr. AA confided that he was experiencing exactly what
she did in the parallel process of supervision—namely, that he was failing
as a supervisor because none of his suggestions seemed to be paying off in
the therapy. He then raised several questions to Dr. Z: Was something be-
ing recreated with her that reflected the patient’s internal world? Would


--- PAGE 196 ---
Use of Supervision
181
there be some reason that he would want to induce a feeling of failure or
helplessness in Dr. Z? When Dr. Z returned to see the patient, instead of
offering possible interpretations and suggestions, she simply made an ob-
servation about the process and how she was feeling that nothing she said
was useful to him. She wondered if this were recreating something, and
the patient immediately said that his mother had always said the same
thing to him. This led to an exploration of the transference to the thera-
pist as a mother whom the patient needed to frustrate.
In psychotherapy the therapist must “detoxify” painful affect states pro-
jected by the patient. Something analogous happens in supervision when
certain affects may be evoked in the supervisor resembling those with
which the supervisee is struggling. Dr. AA tried to contain those affects
and find ways to help the supervisee use them productively in the process
(Gabbard and Lester 2003; Gabbard and Wilkinson 1994). He tried to
translate the feelings of futility and impotence he was having into words
that were useful to the supervisee in understanding the process with the
patient. The supervisor’s self-disclosure in this situation may be just as
valuable as therapist self-disclosure to the patient.
This vignette also illustrates that the supervisor may at times project
self and object representations along with their associated affects onto
the supervisee. In other words, an alternative way of understanding the
vignette is that the supervisor may have been “taking over” too much and
telling the supervisee what to do with the patient. The supervisee may
then have treated the patient as someone who also needed to be told what
to do, rather than encouraging more self-initiative. The parallel process
can work in either direction. However one understands the process be-
tween supervisor and supervisee, the most important principle to take
from this discussion is that whatever is transpiring must be courageously
examined by both supervisor and supervisee to see what it reveals about
the difficulties in the therapy.
When a good level of trust has been established within the supervisory
alliance, deliberate role playing may be an excellent way to facilitate the
emergence of hidden countertransferences or blind spots in the therapist.
When the supervisee assumes the role of the patient with the supervisor
in the role of therapist, this arrangement also provides the supervisee
with the opportunity to see how the supervisor might address problems
the patient presents to the therapist. Also, while portraying the patient,
the supervisee may gain greater empathy for the patient’s experience of
the therapist’s efforts to help.


--- PAGE 197 ---
182
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Common Problems in Supervision
The Chatty Supervisor
Many supervisors assigned to trainees are clinicians who spend a good
deal of their time listening to their patients’ problems. When the super-
visee enters their office, they may seize the opportunity to chit-chat rather
than help the supervisee with patient-based problems. Because they have
to spend the day listening, they may see the arrival of a supervisee as an
opportunity for a little socialization. A few minutes of this type of inter-
action may be tolerable and even comfortable, as it puts the supervisee at
ease. When it becomes a pattern that interferes with the supervisee’s
learning process, however, some action may need to be taken.
Some supervisors who feel isolated in private practice may wish to gos-
sip a bit about mutual acquaintances with their supervisees. They may
pump them for information about the latest developments in a colleague’s
private life or in the academic department from which the trainee comes.
Still others may wish to talk about movies, television programs, or books
because they are starved for conversation after seeing patients all day.
Some supervisees can manage this type of supervisor by simply begin-
ning their discussion of their patient as soon as they walk in the door. This
“down-to-business” attitude makes it clear to the supervisor that the su-
pervisee is there to get help with patient problems. If this technique fails
to work because the supervisor interrupts the supervisee to chit-chat, a
gentle confrontation may be necessary: “I don’t mean to be impolite, Dr. X,
but I really need help with this patient today, so if you don’t mind, I’d
like to get back to the material.” Many supervisees are terrified of assert-
ing their own right to get supervision because of their transference to the
supervisor as a distinguished and powerful person in their community
who has evaluative power over them. However, most supervisors recog-
nize their obligation to supervise, and they may respond promptly to such
gentle confrontation. If their behavior persists, the supervisee may need
to bring it up with the training director.
The Sleepy Supervisor
Supervisors of psychotherapy trainees may work excessively long hours
to accommodate the schedules of their patients, and they may allow their
attention to lapse during supervision, where there is less pressure than
there is with a patient. They may even drift into somnolence as they lis-
ten to the supervisee. This common experience is disconcerting to trainee


--- PAGE 198 ---
Use of Supervision
183
therapists, who fear that they could be boring the supervisor and may feel
that they have some responsibility for putting the supervisor to sleep. In
fact, supervisees have no obligation to entertain their supervisor. Never-
theless, it may be worth exploring whether there is some type of jointly
constructed phenomenon in the supervision that could be processed be-
tween the two parties. A supervisee might say to the supervisor, “I notice
your eyelids are getting heavy, and I wonder if I am presenting this in
some way that is putting you to sleep. Would there be a better model of
our doing supervision that would be more lively?” This approach allows
for the possibility that the supervisee may contribute to the supervisor’s
sleepiness but also opens up the possibility of considering different mod-
els of supervision. Something as simple as sharing coffee together during
supervision may be useful in some cases.
The Boundaryless Supervisor
One female trainee arrived in her male supervisor’s office, and the super-
visor asked her to sit next to him on his couch. She handled it admirably
by simply saying that she preferred the chair. Not all trainees have the
presence of mind to set limits with a supervisor who is boundaryless.
Some may be intimidated because of transference to the supervisor. They
may feel they have no choice than to go along with the supervisor’s whim.
The boundarylessness may also come in the form of nosiness. Some su-
pervisors will ask their supervisees if they are single or married, if they are
straight or gay, if they are in personal therapy or analysis, or if they had
particular childhood difficulties. Some supervisors may hug the supervi-
see or offer a peck on the cheek. Supervisees need to feel free in these
instances to openly express their discomfort with any boundaryless situ-
ation their supervisor presents. Often the simple statement that “I’m not
comfortable with this” causes the behavior to cease. If it does not, the su-
pervisee may need to resort to a complaint to the training director.
The Authoritarian Supervisor
Supervisors who appear to know exactly the right intervention in every
situation of supervision may be daunting to the trainee. A sense of cer-
tainty may actually be extraordinarily appealing to the supervisee, since
so much is uncertain in the practice of psychotherapy. The supervisor’s
certainty might grow out of a conviction that one particular theoretical
model is the embodiment of “Truth.” Hence authoritarian supervisors
may convey that all the trainee needs to do is grasp the preferred theo-
retical model to have all the answers to their therapeutic dilemmas.


--- PAGE 199 ---
184
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Although there may be appeal in the supervisor’s certainty, many
supervisees feel like they are falling short of their teacher’s expectations
whenever they do not adhere to the supervisor’s favorite theory. At the
very least, trainees should feel free to ask their supervisors to explicate
the basis of their advice in terms of the underlying theoretical model. If
a supervisor with a self psychological orientation, for example, insists that
a trainee needs to have greater empathy for the patient’s point of view,
the trainee can ask the supervisor to explain the rationale for an empathic
approach and then discuss what the supervisor sees as problems with al-
ternative approaches. Trainees should not feel obligated to force their pa-
tients to fit the supervisor’s preferred theory. If they see that other per-
spectives are a better fit for the patient, they should make the case to the
supervisor and encourage open dialogue on the subject. Patients rarely ben-
efit from a therapist who is simply going along with the authoritarian di-
rectives of a supervisor. A trainee therapist, like all therapists, must feel free
to be flexible and spontaneous in the therapeutic situation.
Reluctance to Give Up the Supervisor or Supervisee
At the end of the training year, most training programs insist that stu-
dents shift to another supervisor so they can benefit from different styles
of supervision and gain exposure to different theoretical models of psy-
chotherapy. Some supervisees may develop great attachment to their su-
pervisors and might find it difficult to relinquish them at the end of the
academic year. They might even request to continue for another year with
the same supervisor. Although this may be flattering to the supervisor, it
is probably in the student’s best interest to learn multiple perspectives on
psychotherapy during the training period. Occasionally, the request for
continued supervision comes from the supervisor, who is having such a pos-
itive experience with a student that he or she does not wish to end the
supervisory relationship. The supervisee must feel free to move on to a
different supervisor in such cases, even if expression of that preference
may hurt the supervisor’s feelings. Policies in training programs that limit
the duration of supervision may be helpful in allowing the supervisee to
fall back on departmental policy when such questions arise.
From Supervision to Consultation
The effective use of supervision during one’s training year sets the tone
for ongoing consultation throughout one’s professional life. Therapists
should develop an attitude that they do not have to solve every problem


--- PAGE 200 ---
Use of Supervision
185
on their own. Even if therapists have their own personal treatment expe-
rience—which is extraordinarily helpful in dynamic therapy—they will
still have blind spots. Consultants who are not immersed in the heat of
the transference-countertransference dynamics bring an outside perspec-
tive to the dyad that is enormously valuable when one is stuck at an im-
passe with a patient.
Once one is out of training, consultation means extra expense. One
must pay the consultant in most cases, and one also loses time in the office
when traveling to the consultant’s office. Hence therapists often think up
numerous excuses and rationalizations to avoid consulting a colleague
when they are in a difficult situation. Many individuals who choose to
spend their lives as psychotherapists may have an unconscious need for a
succession of one-to-one exclusive relationships guarded by the mantle
of a radical form of privacy (Gabbard 2000). This quasi-incestuous ar-
rangement that excludes an outside third party may create a situation of
a secret, forbidden activity that is off limits to outsiders. Boundary viola-
tions are an ever-present risk in the lives of therapists, and scrutiny by a
third party is an essential part of the prevention of serious transgressions.
When a consultant is brought into the situation, the process is no longer
an exclusively dyadic secret, and the quasi-incestuous arrangement is
shattered by the presence of an observer. A consultant may also serve as
a kind of auxiliary superego that helps the therapist think clearly about
the appropriate boundaries of the therapeutic situation and avoid ratio-
nalizing various deviations from those boundaries.
Concerns about confidentiality can be used as a barrier to consulta-
tion, but a consultant has the same constraints on confidentiality as a
therapist, so nothing can be shared by the consultant with any outside par-
ties. To further preserve confidentiality, therapists may avoid using the
name of the patient or specific identifying information. Some therapists
prefer to telephone consultants who live in another city so the consult-
ants have no way of discerning the identity of the patient.
One can always corrupt a consultation process by sharing only partial
information with the consultant. Another common strategy that consul-
tees have used is to choose a consultant they know will agree with them.
If they are engaged in questionable behavior in the psychotherapy pro-
cess, they can present it in such a way that the consultant will sanction
what they are doing, and they can document what the consultant said to
bolster their deviation from ordinary psychotherapy. The ideal consultant
should be someone who creates an atmosphere of acceptance and toler-
ance but who also is willing to confront the therapist about problematic
comments or behaviors in the therapy. Useful consultation begins with
careful attention to the selection of the consultant. In both supervision
