

--- PAGE 1 ---


--- PAGE 2 ---
Long-Term 
Psychodynamic 
Psychotherapy
A Basic Text


--- PAGE 3 ---


--- PAGE 4 ---
Washington, DC
London, England
Long-Term
Psychodynamic
Psychotherapy
A Basic Text
Glen O. Gabbard, M.D.
Brown Foundation Chair of Psychoanalysis
Professor of Psychiatry 
Director of Psychotherapy Education
Director, Baylor Psychiatry Clinic
Baylor College of Medicine
Houston, Texas
Joint Editor-in-Chief
International Journal of Psychoanalysis


--- PAGE 5 ---
Note:
The authors have worked to ensure that all information in this book is ac-
curate at the time of publication and consistent with general psychiatric and med-
ical standards, and that information concerning drug dosages, schedules, and
routes of administration is accurate at the time of publication and consistent with
standards set by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the general medical
community. As medical research and practice continue to advance, however,
therapeutic standards may change. Moreover, specific situations may require a
specific therapeutic response not included in this book. For these reasons and be-
cause human and mechanical errors sometimes occur, we recommend that read-
ers follow the advice of physicians directly involved in their care or the care of a
member of their family.
Books published by American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc., represent the views
and opinions of the individual authors and do not necessarily represent the poli-
cies and opinions of APPI or the American Psychiatric Association.
Copyright © 2004 American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Manufactured in the United States of America on acid-free paper
08
07
06
05
04
5
4
3
2
1
First Edition
Typeset in Adobe’s Berling Roman and Frutiger 55 Roman
American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc.
1000 Wilson Boulevard
Arlington, VA 22209-3901
www.appi.org
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Gabbard, Glen O.
Long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy : a basic text / Glen O. Gabbard.
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-58562-144-7 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Psychodynamic psychotherapy. 2. Psychotherapist and patient. I. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Psychoanalytic Therapy—methods. WM 460.6 G112La 2004]
RC489.P72G315 2004
616.89′14—dc22
2003065595
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP record is available from the British Library.


--- PAGE 6 ---
Contents
Introduction to the Core Competencies in 
Psychotherapy Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xi
1
Key Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
2
Assessment, Indications, and Formulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3
The Nuts and Bolts of Psychotherapy: Getting Started. . . . . 41
4
Therapeutic Interventions: What Does the Therapist 
Say and Do? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5
Goals and Therapeutic Action  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
6
Working With Resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
7
Use of Dreams and Fantasies in Dynamic Psychotherapy . . 117
8
Identifying and Working With Countertransference . . . . . 131
9
Working Through and Termination. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
10
Use of Supervision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
11
Evaluating Core Competencies in Long-Term 
Psychodynamic Psychotherapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199


--- PAGE 7 ---
This page intentionally left blank 


--- PAGE 8 ---
vii
Introduction to the 
Core Competencies in 
Psychotherapy Series
With the extraordinary progress in the neurosciences and psychophar-
macology in recent years, some psychiatric training programs have de-
emphasized psychotherapy education. Many residents and educators
have decried the loss of the “mind” in the increasing emphasis on the bio-
logical basis of mental illness and the shift toward somatic treatments as the
central therapeutic strategy in psychiatry. This shift in emphasis has been
compounded by the common practice in our managed care era of “split
treatment,” meaning that psychiatrists are often relegated to seeing the
patient for a brief medication management session, while the psychother-
apy is conducted by a mental health professional from another discipline.
This shift in emphasis has created considerable concern among both psy-
chiatric educators and the consumers of psychiatric education—the resi-
dents themselves.
The importance of psychotherapy in the training of psychiatrists has re-
cently been reaffirmed, however, as a result of the widespread movement
toward the establishment of core competencies throughout all medical
specialties. In 1999 both the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical
Education (ACGME) and the American Board of Medical Specialties
(ABMS) recognized that a set of organizing principles was necessary to
measure competence in medical education. These six principles—patient


--- PAGE 9 ---
viii
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
care, medical knowledge, interpersonal and communication skills, practice-
based learning and improvement, professionalism, and systems-based
practice—are now collectively referred to as the core competencies in med-
ical education.
This movement within medical education was a direct consequence of
a broader movement launched by the U.S. Department of Education ap-
proximately 20 years ago. All educational projects, including those involv-
ing accreditation, had to develop outcome measures. Those entrusted with
the training of physicians were no exception.
Like all medical specialties, psychiatry has risen to the occasion by
making attempts to translate the notion of core competencies into mean-
ingful psychiatric terms. The inherent ambiguity of a term like “compe-
tence” has sparked much discussion among psychiatric educators. Does the
term mean that practitioners are sufficiently skilled that one would refer
a family member to them for treatment without hesitation? Or does the
term imply rudimentary knowledge and practice that would ensure a rea-
sonable degree of safety? These questions are not yet fully resolved. The
basic understanding of what is meant by core competencies will be evolv-
ing over the next few years as various groups within medicine and psy-
chiatry strive to articulate reasonable standards for educators.
As of July 2002, the Psychiatry Residency Review Committee (RRC)
mandated that all psychiatric residency training programs must begin im-
plementing the six core competencies in clinical and didactic curricula.
Those programs that fail to do so may receive citations when they undergo
accreditation surveys. This mandate also requires training directors to de-
velop more sophisticated means of evaluating the progress and learning
of residents in their programs.
As part of the process of adapting the core competencies to psychiatry,
the Psychiatry RRC felt that reasonable competence in five different forms
of psychotherapy—long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy, supportive
psychotherapy, cognitive behavioral psychotherapy, brief psychotherapy,
and psychotherapy combined with psychopharmacology—should be an
outcome of a good psychiatric education for all psychiatric residents.
Many training programs have had to scramble to find faculty who are
well trained in these modalities and teaching materials to facilitate the
learning process. American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc., felt that the pub-
lication of basic texts in each of the five mandated areas would be of great
value to training programs. So in 2002 Dr. Robert Hales, editor-in-chief
at American Psychiatric Publishing, appointed me to be the series editor
of a new line of five books. This series is titled Core Competencies in Psy-
chotherapy and features five brief texts by leading experts in each of the
psychotherapies. Each volume covers the key principles of practice in the


--- PAGE 10 ---
Introduction to the Core Competencies in Psychotherapy Series
ix
treatment and also suggests ways to evaluate whether residents have been
trained to a level of competence in each of the therapies. (For more in-
formation about the books in this series and their availability, please visit
www.appi.org.)
True expertise in psychotherapy requires many years of experience
with skilled supervision and consultation. However, the basic tools can be
learned during residency training so that freshly minted psychiatrists are
prepared to deliver necessary treatments to the broad range of patients
they encounter.
These books will be valuable adjuncts to the traditional methods of psy-
chotherapy education: supervision, classroom teaching, and clinical expe-
rience with a variety of patients. We feel confident that mastery of the
material in these five volumes will constitute a major step in the acquisi-
tion of competency in psychotherapy and, ultimately, the compassionate
care of patients who come to us for help.
Glen O. Gabbard, M.D., Series Editor
Brown Foundation Chair of Psychoanalysis and 
Professor of Psychiatry 
Director of Psychotherapy Education
Director, Baylor Psychiatry Clinic
Baylor College of Medicine
Houston, Texas


--- PAGE 11 ---
This page intentionally left blank 


--- PAGE 12 ---
xi
Introduction
This basic primer in long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy was
prompted by the Psychiatry Residency Review Committee mandate that
all psychiatric residents must be trained to competency in five different
psychotherapies. However, I have written it with a broader audience in
mind. Many other mental health professionals—future psychologists, social
workers, licensed counselors, nurses, and others—are also in training pro-
grams that teach this modality, and they may find this a useful beginning
text as well. Indeed, much of the material in this volume has grown out
of my weekly experiences with trainees in all the major mental health
professions in the Baylor Psychiatry Clinic Case Conference. Each Wednes-
day morning, a trainee in psychiatry, psychology, or social work presents
a clinical problem encountered in psychotherapy that serves as a nidus
for teaching the principles of good therapeutic technique. Rather than
stipulate what topics will be covered, I have geared the Case Conference
to the difficulties that the trainees are struggling with. This approach has
taught me a good deal about the common dilemmas experienced by be-
ginning therapists and their needs as students. I have tried to write this
textbook with those struggles in mind so that beginners will feel that the
case examples and the principles illustrated by those examples will be di-
rectly applicable to their learning experience. I have also written this vol-
ume with training directors in mind, and I hope that they will find my ideas
about evaluating competency useful in their own educational programs.
No brief text can cover a complex treatment comprehensively. Hence
I have given a brief overview of theoretical principles in Chapter 1 (“Key


--- PAGE 13 ---
xii
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Concepts”), with the advice to readers to consult my companion text, Psy-
chodynamic Psychiatry in Clinical Practice, 3rd Edition (Gabbard 2000),
for more detailed discussions of the major theoretical models in psycho-
dynamic psychiatry and the approaches to specific disorders. Similarly,
the text is meant to be accompanied by didactic instruction and weekly
supervision. Long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy is an art that re-
quires intensive teaching and experience, and only with these additional
methods of training can one hope to become competent in the practice
of this treatment.
Space considerations precluded a discussion of mental health financ-
ing or the problems inherent in practicing long-term psychodynamic
psychotherapy in an era of third-party intrusions on the privacy of the
psychotherapeutic relationship. Despite the fact that resources are shrink-
ing for psychiatric treatments in general, a substantial number of patients
continue to seek a long-term therapeutic relationship in which they can feel
understood in the privacy of a confidential professional relationship. More-
over, the principles learned in the practice of long-term dynamic therapy—
empathy, the therapeutic alliance, unconscious meanings, transference, re-
sistance, and the influence of the clinician’s countertransference—are
more generally applicable to all treatments in psychiatry.
Although dynamic therapy can also be delivered in group settings, in
family or conjoint therapies, and with children and adolescents, I have
limited the focus of this text to long-term dynamic work with adults in
individual therapy. To venture into the other areas would exceed the
space limitations within which I was required to operate. I have also
chosen to omit discussions of combining medication with psychother-
apy, because another volume in this series addresses that topic compre-
hensively.
Even with adults in individual long-term dynamic therapy, however,
the treatment itself is highly diverse. The theoretical orientation in which
one is trained may dictate the way a therapist conceptualizes the patient’s
difficulties and implements therapeutic interventions. In addition, the
therapist’s personality places a personal stamp on the therapy conducted.
Therefore it is impossible to cover all approaches to long-term psycho-
dynamic psychotherapy in one text. The approach described in this vol-
ume draws on several theoretical models, reflecting the pluralism in the
field today and my own synthesis of those diverse conceptual frame-
works. The therapy taught in this book also reflects my personal style,
which has evolved over a quarter century of practice in which I have
learned a great deal from trial and error. Some readers will have valid dis-
agreements with how I do things, and I fully accept those legitimate dif-
ferences in perspective.


--- PAGE 14 ---
Introduction
xiii
I owe a special debt of gratitude to my colleagues and students in the
Baylor Psychiatry Clinic, who sustain my enthusiasm for teaching and
treating patients on a daily basis. I am fortunate to work in a setting where
mutual support, good humor, and dedication to patient care are the order
of the day. Some of my colleagues were kind enough to read early drafts
and make valuable suggestions about the text. These include Drs. Linda
Andrews, Kristin Kassaw, Kim-Lan Czelusta, and Jason Garvin. I am grate-
ful to them for pointing out omissions and blind spots. I also want to
thank some of my outstanding students for providing some of the clinical
vignettes in the book. Among these contributors are Drs. Ali Ashgar-Ali,
Faye Brown, Kim-Lan Czelusta, Estelle Cline, Theresa Lau, Rebecca
Maxwell, and Daniel Rogers. I also owe a special thanks to Bob Hales,
editor-in-chief of American Psychiatric Publishing, and John McDuffie,
editorial director, for their steadfast support and wise counsel during the
development of this book. Like most writing projects, this one has been
a team effort. Diane Trees Clay, my dependable and always optimistic as-
sistant, typed many drafts of this book and was a continual source of com-
fort at times of discouragement.
Lastly, I want to express my appreciation to my patients, who have
taught me more than any of my professors or colleagues over the years.
I thank them for tolerating my mistakes of tact, judgment, timing, and
interpretation and for their patience while I learned the art of long-term
psychodynamic psychotherapy.
Reference
Gabbard GO: Psychodynamic Psychiatry in Clinical Practice, 3rd Edition. Wash-
ington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 2000


--- PAGE 15 ---
This page intentionally left blank 


--- PAGE 16 ---
1
1
Key Concepts
During the last session of a 3-year dynamic psychotherapy process, the
patient, a 31-year-old professional man, was silent for a few minutes.
Then he looked up at his therapist and started to speak: “It’s difficult to
say what’s on my mind today. I owe you such a debt of gratitude for all
you’ve done. I didn’t have a clue about what was going on inside me when
I first came to see you. All I knew was that I was a mess. Now, for the first
time in my life, I actually have a sense of who I am and what it is I’m seek-
ing from others. I wasn’t an easy patient. I hid out from you for a long
time. I played games with you to avoid looking at myself. But you found
me...eventually. You were incredibly patient and persistent. I can’t thank
you enough for that. I’ll tell you something—even though you haven’t
said a lot about yourself, I feel like I know you intimately, and I’ll never
forget you.”
In this poignant communication to his therapist, a grateful patient offers
a glimpse into the reasons for the continued popularity of long-term psy-
chodynamic psychotherapy. The thirst to understand, to “know thyself,”
persists despite managed care, the quick-fix mentality of our society, and
the remarkable progress in psychopharmacology. The much-publicized
Consumer Reports survey of patients (“Mental Health” 1995) showed that
patient satisfaction increased with increasing duration of therapy. Pa-
tients seeking in-depth knowledge about themselves may pay for therapy
out of their own discretionary funds even though the treatment often takes
years. Yet despite the continued popularity of long-term dynamic ther-
apy, it is widely misunderstood. Common misconceptions include the
following:


--- PAGE 17 ---
2
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
1. The psychodynamic therapist is largely silent.
2. Breakthroughs occur in dramatic emotional catharses when a repressed
memory is suddenly uncovered.
3. The main focus of such therapy is the patient’s sexuality.
4. All reactions to the therapist are distortions of the current situation
based on past relationships.
5. The therapy is both interminable and ineffectual (much like the treat-
ment of the protagonists in Woody Allen’s films).
6. The psychodynamic therapist is a stone-faced blank screen who does
not disclose any of his or her own personal reactions to the patient.
7. The psychodynamic therapist never expresses an opinion that com-
municates a judgment about what the patient says.
Although long-term psychodynamic therapy is derived from psycho-
analysis, even Freud practiced in a way that differed dramatically from
these various misconceptions about psychodynamic therapy. Psycho-
dynamic therapists today are more likely to be actively engaged with the
patient, to resonate emotionally with the patient’s affect states, to be far
from passive or stone-faced, to be talkative when it is useful, and to be
mindful of how they themselves contribute to the patient’s perception of
them. They are also rarely privy to dramatic revelations from the deeply
buried past.
If we were to attempt to characterize contemporary long-term psycho-
dynamic psychotherapy, we might use the following definition: “A therapy
that involves careful attention to the therapist-patient interaction, with
thoughtfully timed interpretation of transference and resistance embedded
in a sophisticated appreciation of the therapist’s contribution to the two-
person field” (Gunderson and Gabbard 1999, p. 685). The conceptual
models for this therapy include unconscious conflict derived from ego psy-
chology, object relations theory, self psychology, and attachment theory.
Although long-term psychodynamic therapy once meant an exclu-
sively open-ended process that did not have a defined end point, today
there are therapies of 40 or 52 sessions that have targeted end points from
the beginning but still use many of the same principles inherent in long-
term psychodynamic therapy (Barber et al. 1997; Svartberg et al., in press;
Winston et al. 1994). In an era of managed care, where 8–12 sessions may
be the maximum number allowed, time-limited therapies of 40–52 ses-
sions should definitely be included within the overarching rubric of long-
term treatment. We thus have two categories: 1) time-limited, in which
the number of sessions is predetermined, and 2) open-ended, in which
the therapy is designed to end naturalistically. For purposes of definition,
one must make an arbitrary boundary. With full awareness of the arbi-


--- PAGE 18 ---
Key Concepts
3
trariness inherent in this cutoff point, in this book we define long term as
therapies with duration longer than 24 sessions or 6 months.
A set of fundamental theories and principles constitute the foundation
of psychodynamic therapy, and these are reviewed extensively in my com-
panion text, Psychodynamic Psychiatry in Clinical Practice, 3rd Edition
(Gabbard 2000). A brief overview is provided here to lay out the essen-
tial concepts and their theoretical implications (Table 1–1).
Key Concepts of Psychodynamic 
Psychotherapy
Unconscious Mental Functioning
Although Freud did not discover the unconscious mind, he elaborated a
theory and technique that gave it central importance. This emphasis on un-
conscious mental life remains at the heart of psychoanalytic or psychody-
namic psychotherapy. However, the way we think about unconscious
mental functioning has evolved considerably since the days of Freud’s early
writings. Freud originally focused on the topographic model of the mind,
which involved a stratified hierarchy of conscious, preconscious, and un-
conscious domains. Although material in the unconscious could not be
brought into awareness easily, preconscious contents could be retrieved by
simply shifting one’s attention. Much of Freud’s writings focused on “the
unconscious,” a reservoir that contained dynamically repressed contents
that were kept out of awareness because they created conflict. Freud’s ini-
tial approach to psychoanalysis was to try to bring those unconscious con-
tents to the surface beyond the repression barrier so they could be exam-
ined and understood. Freud soon learned, though, that the derepression of
memories through cathartic abreactions did not result in durable changes.
Table 1–1.
Basic principles of psychodynamic psychotherapy
Much of mental life is unconscious.
Childhood experiences in concert with genetic factors shape the adult.
The patient’s transference to the therapist is a primary source of understanding.
The therapist’s countertransference provides valuable understanding about what 
the patient induces in others.
The patient’s resistance to the therapy process is a major focus of the therapy.
Symptoms and behaviors serve multiple functions and are determined by 
complex and often unconscious forces.
A psychodynamic therapist assists the patient in achieving a sense of 
authenticity and uniqueness.


--- PAGE 19 ---
4
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Freud’s model gradually became more complicated, culminating, in
1923, in the introduction of the tripartite structural theory comprising
ego, id, and superego (Freud 1923/1961). In the structural model, the ego
is viewed as distinct from the aggressive and sexual drives. The conscious
aspects of the ego include the executive functions of the mind, such as
decision making, integration of perceptual data, and mental calculations.
The unconscious aspects of the ego principally involve defense mecha-
nisms designed to counteract the powerful instinctual drives harbored in
the id. Sexuality and aggression are regarded as the basic drives, and they
require massive defensive efforts from the ego to prevent them from be-
coming disruptive to the person’s functioning. 
As shown in Figure 1–1, the id is entirely unconscious and is controlled
both by the unconscious aspects of the ego and by a third agency called
the superego. The superego is predominantly unconscious and represents
the internalization of moral values from parents and others in the indi-
vidual’s environment. Sometimes the superego is subdivided into an ego
ideal and a moral conscience. Whereas the ego ideal proscribes (i.e., dic-
tates what one should not do based on one’s value system), the moral con-
science or superego proper prescribes (i.e., dictates what one should do).
This structural model lends itself to a theory of unconscious conflict.
The three intrapsychic agencies of id, ego, and superego are in constant
conflict, revolving around the expression and discharge of sexuality and
aggression. Signal anxiety is produced by conflict between these agencies
(Freud 1926/1959). This type of anxiety alerts the ego that a defense
mechanism is required to curb expressions of aggression or sexuality that
seem forbidden. The formation of symptoms related to neurotic conflict
evolves in this manner. In other words, conflict produces signal anxiety,
which then results in a defense, which then leads to a compromise be-
tween the id and the ego or the id and the superego. A symptom, then, can
be understood as a compromise formation that defends against a wish
while also gratifying the wish in disguised form.
Although unconscious conflict continues to be a pervasive phenomenon
addressed in psychodynamic therapy, our understanding of unconscious
mental activity has undergone a transformation over the intervening cen-
tury since Freud formulated his theories. His basic premise, that much of
mental life is unconscious, has been extensively validated by research in the
field of experimental psychology (Westen 1999). However, the view of “the
unconscious” as a spatial metaphor where contents reside is much less prev-
alent in modern discourse. Today a neuroscience-informed psychodynamic
therapist would be more likely to refer to unconscious mental functioning
or unconscious representations rather than “the unconscious.” Memories are
stored differently depending on the type of knowledge involved.


--- PAGE 20 ---
Key Concepts
5
Declarative memory involves facts or generic knowledge, whereas pro-
cedural memory involves skills (Figure 1–2) (Squire 1987; Westen and
Gabbard 2002a, 2002b). Memories of either type can be either explicit
or implicit, which refers to the mode of expression of retrieval—that is,
whether or not there is conscious awareness (Westen and Gabbard 2002a).
Remembering the name of one’s fifth-grade teacher is an example of ex-
plicit declarative memory, because the fact is readily retrievable by sim-
ply shifting one’s attention. On the other hand, if hearing a certain song
on the radio evokes tears and the listener has no idea why, this may well
be an example of implicit declarative memory. In other words, an event
related to the song—perhaps the breakup of a relationship—is forever
connected to the song, but the exact connection between the event and
the song does not readily come to mind. Therapeutic exploration, how-
ever, might retrieve that connection.
Procedural memory involves knowledge of “how,” whereas declarative
memory involves knowledge “of” (Gabbard 2000). The “how-to” of related-
ness is internalized early in life, and there are automatic ways that each per-
son relates to others, based on early experience. Procedural memory is gen-
erally implicit when it involves the natural way that the patient relates to the
therapist when walking through the door and greeting the therapist each
day. Implicit procedural memory is also responsible for many defense mech-
anisms, which automatically deal with unpleasant feelings by driving them
out of one’s awareness. However, procedural memory can also be explicit if
Figure 1–1.
The structural model.
Note.
The preconscious has been deleted for the sake of simplicity.
Source.
Reprinted from Gabbard GO: Psychodynamic Psychiatry in Clinical Practice, 3rd
Edition. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 2000. Used with permission.
Conscious
Unconscious
Conscious
Unconscious
S
U
P
E
R
E
G
O
E
G
O
ID


--- PAGE 21 ---
6
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Figure 1–2.
Type of knowledge versus mode of expression.
Source.
Reprinted from Gabbard GO: Psychodynamic Psychiatry in Clinical Practice, 3rd Edition. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 2000. Used
with permission.
Implicit
Type of 
knowledge
Procedural
(skills)
Declarative
(facts)
Mode of expression or retrieval 
(with or without conscious awareness)
Explicit


--- PAGE 22 ---
Key Concepts
7
the mode of expression is with conscious awareness. Suppression is such a
defense mechanism. If a male patient finds himself angry at his therapist but
is afraid the relationship will be damaged by an expression of anger, he may
consciously suppress the anger and push it out of his conscious awareness.
Procedural and declarative memory work in an integrated fashion, and in
practice it is difficult at times to separate the two types of memory.
A Developmental Perspective
The need for a developmental point of view is a core assumption of psy-
chodynamic thinking. Childhood experiences, in concert with the genetic
characteristics of an individual, shape the adult person. Our knowledge of
genetics and cognitive neuroscience suggests that the genetically based
temperament of the child shapes much of the interaction with the parents.
Characteristics that are inherited evoke specific parental responses (Reiss
et al. 1995). The behavior of the parents, in turn, shapes the child’s per-
sonality. In this regard, it is an oversimplification to blame parents for their
children’s problems. A complex interaction between the child’s inherent
traits, the parents’ psychological characteristics, and the “fit” between par-
ent and child is crucial to the developmental perspective (Gabbard 2000).
Early psychoanalytic theory involved an understanding of development
that was based on libidinal zones. The child’s libido or sex drive was linked
to oral, anal, and phallic regions of the body. The child then entered an oe-
dipal phase in which he or she wished to be the exclusive love object of the
opposite-sex parent. This phase involved an acute awareness of a compli-
cated triangle involving mother, father, and child. The negative oedipal con-
stellation describes the child’s longing for the same-sex parent, wherein the
opposite-sex parent is seen as a rival. Both positive and negative oedipal
themes are typically observable in development.
In the male child, the development of the superego was regarded as
the outcome of the oedipal phase of development. The child resigns him-
self to the fact that he cannot possess his mother because of the aggres-
sion toward his father that is inherent in such wishes, and the child reluc-
tantly resigns himself to the fact that it is better to identify with his father
than to risk the father’s retaliation. Castration anxiety was viewed as a
fundamental concern of the male oedipal-phase child, who fears that his
father might retaliate by attacking the child’s genitals. To avoid this dire
possibility, the boy identifies with his father and looks for a woman like
his own mother so that he can avoid directly competing with his father.
The oedipal constellation for the female child was not nearly as coher-
ent in Freud’s classical conceptualization. Feminist theories of develop-
ment have superseded the classical view of the girl child as an inferior


--- PAGE 23 ---
8
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
male who suffered from penis envy. More contemporary views of female
psychological development regard the development of female identity as
involving complex contributions from genes, culture, identifications with
parents, and internal object relations rather than simple assumptions
about anatomical differences (Benjamin 1990; Chodorow 1996).
Another key feature in developmental theory is the notion that early
experiences of the self with others, along with their associated affect states,
are internalized to produce representations of those interpersonal inter-
actions (Fonagy and Target 2003). These internal object relationships are
repeated again and again throughout life, and the problematic interac-
tions of a patient described in psychotherapy generally derive from early
relationship difficulties encountered as a child. The internal representa-
tion of a parent may not be exactly the same thing as the external figure
on whom the representation is based. The child’s fantasies about the par-
ents may exaggerate tendencies that are inherent in the parental inter-
actions, so that the self and object representations that become etched in
specific neural networks may, to varying degrees, depart from the actual
characteristics of the external figure.
Object relations theory as we know it today largely developed in the
United Kingdom, where Melanie Klein tried to integrate drive theory
with internal object relations. Subsequent thinkers, such as W.R.D. Fairbairn
and D.W. Winnicott, developed what is known as the British independent
perspective, which argued that the primary motivation of the child is object
seeking rather than drive gratification (the classical Freudian view) (Gab-
bard 2000).
Whereas ego psychology emphasizes intrapsychic conflict, Heinz Kohut
(1971, 1977, 1984) developed self psychology based on a deficit model
of development. Kohut suggested that many individuals lack develop-
mentally appropriate empathy from their mothers, and this leaves them
with a deficit within them. This sense of something missing leads them
to seek out responses from others to make up for the functions they lack
within themselves. Kohut called these selfobject functions. Development,
in his view, depends on a process whereby the self is gradually made more
cohesive through selfobject responses from caregivers.
The self psychological perspective is consistent with some of the infant
observation work of Daniel Stern (1985, 1989). He noted that validating
and affirming responses from one’s mother or caregiver are crucial for the
developing infant’s sense of self. Kohut stressed that without these re-
sponses, the self is prone to fragmentation, creating a clinical picture of
extreme narcissistic vulnerability.
Although attachment theory is somewhat related to object relations
theory, it developed separately. Bowlby (1988) repeatedly emphasized the


--- PAGE 24 ---
Key Concepts
9
importance of the child’s real experience rather than fantasy, in sharp
contrast to Kleinian thinking. Bowlby believed there was an entire system
of behavior on the part of the child that was designed to maintain prox-
imity to the mother or caregiver (Fonagy 2001). In attachment theory the
motivation of the child is not simply to seek out an object but rather to
achieve a soothing psychophysiological state that derives from physical
closeness to the mother or caregiver. Different classifications of attach-
ment have been developed from studying the infant’s response to what is
known as the strange situation (Ainsworth et al. 1978). When exposed to
brief separations from the mother, a child may react in one of four general
categories that allow for attachment classification: 1) securely attached,
2) anxious-avoidantly attached, 3) anxious-ambivalent or resistant, and
4) disorganized/disoriented. These attachment categories have some degree
of correlation with analogous categories of adult attachment: 1) secure/
autonomous; 2) insecure/dismissing adults who idealize, denigrate, deny,
and devalue both past and current attachments; 3) preoccupied adults,
who are confused or overwhelmed by close relationships; and 4) unre-
solved or disorganized individuals, who often have been victims of trauma
or neglect. Insecure attachment accompanied by trauma or neglect may
hamper the development of the capacity to mentalize, that is, conceive of
another person’s mind or one’s own as a source of motivation.
This cursory survey of some of the leading developmental theories does
not do justice to the controversy and complexity about development that
characterize contemporary psychoanalytic views. (For more detailed dis-
cussions, see Gabbard 2000 and Fonagy and Target 2003.) Each of the
models may be of value in specific clinical situations, and the psychody-
namic therapist adapts the theoretical model to the patient (Table 1–2).
Regardless of the theoretical model of development, the psychody-
namic view is consistent in approaching the adult patient as a product of
important early experiences that continue to be repeated in the present
with others, including the therapist.
Transference
When childhood patterns of relatedness are repeated in the present with
the therapist, one can observe the core psychodynamic concept of trans-
ference. Qualities of a figure from the past are attributed to the doctor,
and feelings associated with that figure are experienced in the same way
with the doctor. Freud’s original idea was that transference was a “stereo-
type plate” (Freud 1912/1958). Freud assumed that libidinal or sexual
desires from childhood were transferred directly onto the person of the an-
alyst. The Kleinian and object relations theorists expanded the notion of


--- PAGE 25 ---
10
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Table 1–2.
Developmental models
Theoretical model
Motivation
Basic units of 
development
Psychopathology
Ego psychology
Drive gratification
Ego
Id
Superego
Conflict/compromise formation
Object relations theory
Object seeking
Representation of self and 
other linked by an affect
Recurrent maladaptive relationship patterns based 
on externalization of internal object relationships
Self psychology
Self-cohesion/self-esteem
Self-selfobject
Fragmentation of self/narcissistic vulnerability
Attachment theory
Physical sense of safety
Internal working models
Insecure attachment/failure of mentalization
