

--- PAGE 76 ---
Therapeutic Interventions
61
comment within a session all say a great deal about the therapist. Thera-
pists do not talk about their private lives, their families, or their personal
problems, however, because the inherent asymmetry of the relationship
makes it imperative that the major focus be on the patient’s issues. Shar-
ing personal problems with patients can burden them so that they feel re-
sponsible to take care of the therapist.
The original view of anonymity was that it was necessary to conceal
the “real characteristics” of the therapist from the patient to avoid “contam-
inating” the patient’s transference to the therapist. This view is no longer
endorsed by most dynamic therapists because it is now widely understood
that whatever the therapist does has a continuing impact on the patient’s
perception of the therapist, so it is virtually impossible to avoid influenc-
ing the patient’s transference. For example, if therapists choose to assume
a silent, remote, stone-faced posture, the patient will view the therapist
as aloof, silent, and difficult to engage emotionally. The transference will,
in part, be a realistic perception of the way the therapist is behaving
rather than a reflection of the patient’s past relationships.
Abstinence as a principle is an admonition to avoid excessive gratifica-
tion of the patient’s transference wishes. A total absence of gratification,
however, would result in losing the patient. Unless the patient gets some-
thing from the therapist, the therapy is unlikely to continue. Even worse,
the patient may masochistically submit to a cold therapist, thinking there
will ultimately be some reward for submission. Therapists provide a good
deal of gratification in simply listening in a humane and warm way to the
patient’s concerns. They may laugh in response to a joke. They may tear
up on hearing a sad story. They may obviously enjoy seeing the patient at
the beginning of each session as manifested in their facial expression.
They certainly do maintain abstinence regarding the gratification of sex-
ual wishes and any other form of potential exploitation of the patient for
their own personal needs.
An attitude of restraint is probably the current-day derivative of this
psychoanalytic tradition based on anonymity, neutrality, and abstinence.
Therapists generally want the patient to be in a position of deciding what’s
best for them, regardless of the therapist’s attitudes. At the same time,
some degree of spontaneity is also desirable. Therapists must allow them-
selves to be engaged by the patient’s “dance” and allow a certain degree
of countertransference to run its course to get to know the patient’s in-
ternal world. If a therapist is completely unwilling to follow the patient’s
lead on the therapeutic dance floor, the music may stop. As Gabbard and
Wilkinson (1994) noted, “The optimal state of mind for therapists is when
they can allow themselves to be ‘sucked in’ to the patient’s world while
retaining the ability to observe it happening in front of their eyes. In such


--- PAGE 77 ---
62
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
a state, therapists are truly thinking their own thoughts, even though they
are under the patient’s influence to some extent” (p. 82).
The Therapist’s Interventions
The therapist’s comments to the patient are often grouped into time-
honored categories of psychotherapeutic interventions. Some comments
do not fit any of these categories, however, and concern about using the
proper intervention should not interfere with spontaneous conversation
as it unfolds in the therapeutic dialogue. Interventions can be conceptu-
alized on an expressive-supportive continuum, as shown in Figure 4–1.
On the left side of Figure 4–1, the most expressive intervention is in-
terpretation. This intervention is often regarded as the primary tool of
the psychodynamic psychotherapist in providing insight and understand-
ing to the patient. The intent is to make patients aware of things that are
currently outside their awareness. While this sometimes means that one
is making conscious something that was previously unconscious, at other
times it involves pointing out connections between phenomena when the
patient does not see the linkage. There is also an explanatory aspect to an
interpretation. Therapists try to help their patients gain insight by ex-
plaining motives and meanings. The following vignette gives an example
of interpretive work.
A 22-year-old young man who is having difficulty establishing himself in
the world tells his female therapist that his mother is upset with him be-
cause he is still living at home and can’t find any productive work that he
enjoys. He complains to his therapist.
Patient: My mother is always nagging me. I hate living under her
thumb. I wish she would just leave me alone.
Therapist: Yet you don’t apply for jobs so that you could establish
yourself independently.
Patient: That’s because I can’t find anything interesting in the clas-
sified ads.
Therapist: Sometimes you may have to work at a job that you don’t
really like just so you can be on your own and not be pres-
sured by your parents.
Patient: Believe me, I’ve looked through the classifieds and there’s
nothing available in the current situation of high unem-
ployment. We’re in an economic crisis.
Therapist: You know, I have the impression that you actually cre-
ate a nagging situation with both your mom and me by tak-
ing an oppositional stance regarding trying a new job. I won-
der if being nagged makes you feel like someone cares about
you.


--- PAGE 78 ---
Therapeutic Interventions
63
Figure 4–1.
An expressive-supportive continuum of interventions.
Empathic
validation
Supportive
Expressive
     Observation                   Clarification
Psychoeducational
interventions
Encouragement
to elaborate 
       Interpretation
 Confrontation
Advice and
praise


--- PAGE 79 ---
64
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
In this interpretation, the therapist draws a link between what is hap-
pening with the patient’s mother and what is happening in the transfer-
ence with her. In both situations the patient persists in a pattern of op-
posing the other person’s urging to apply for a job. On the basis of the
therapist’s perspective that the patient is clearly ambivalent about chang-
ing the situation, she deduces that he may be invested in maintaining the
status quo for reasons that are beyond his conscious awareness. She points
out that he feels cared for and watched over and that he doesn’t want to
lose that protection. She delivers the interpretation as a possibility—“I
wonder...”—to avoid an authoritarian stance and to allow for the possi-
bility that the patient has a different view. Unconscious wishes, fantasies,
and beliefs may often be the focus of interpretive work, because they ap-
pear in childhood relationships, in current relationships outside the ther-
apy, and in the transference.
Beginning therapists often make the mistake of equating transference
with what patients say they feel toward the therapist. Transference may
certainly include those verbal expressions of feelings, but it may be more
apparent in the way a patient talks or relates to the therapist. Feelings
that develop in the transference may be unconscious at first. In most cases
one infers the wishes, fears, and feelings of transference before they are ac-
tually in the patient’s conscious awareness and are verbalized. As a gen-
eral principle, one has to postpone the interpretation of transference until
it is close to the patient’s awareness. If it is prematurely interpreted, the
patient may be totally unable to relate to what the therapist is saying and
might feel misunderstood. One useful adage suggests that one should for-
mulate the interpretation and think about it four times before verbalizing
it. Sometimes postponing the interpretation of transference provides time
for patients themselves to recognize their transference feelings.
Mr. C, an attorney in his mid-30s, was in psychotherapy with Dr. D, a fe-
male psychiatrist of approximately the same age. He had had a good deal of
difficulty in finding satisfying intimacy with a romantic partner in his life,
and after the therapy was well established he began dating a single female
minister at his church. He didn’t seem to recognize that this might be a
problem for the minister in that he was placing her in a dual role with one
of her parishioners. In a broad sense, it was a boundary problem for her. He
soon broke up with the minister and began dating a physician. He expressed
frustration to his therapist because when he went to the woman’s home, he
sat on the couch, but she chose to sit in a chair across from him. One time
when he tried to kiss her, she turned her cheek before their lips met.
On hearing this, Dr. D silently noted that he had dated two female
professionals, one of whom was in the same occupation as herself. She
also recognized that the seating arrangement he described in the woman’s
home was almost exactly the same as the seating arrangement in the ther-


--- PAGE 80 ---
Therapeutic Interventions
65
apist’s office, where she sat in a chair and he sat across from her on a couch.
However, she knew that the patient could not yet make this connection,
so she simply made a silent interpretation to herself that he was probably
acting out transference wishes in other relationships.
As Mr. C left the office, he asked Dr. D if she would like a ticket to a
forthcoming concert, since he worked for an organization that had easy ac-
cess to the tickets. Dr. D declined his offer, explaining that accepting gifts
from him might affect the therapeutic relationship in unforeseen ways.
After breaking up with the physician, the patient rapidly developed a
romantic relationship with another physician, and the therapist was
growing increasingly convinced that the pattern reflected a displacement
of erotic transference feelings onto other women professionals. As yet, the
patient was unable to verbalize this dimension of his romantic involve-
ments.
A week later, the Mr. C arrived at a session with great concern that his
flight was going to be canceled because of weather. He asked the therapist
if he could borrow her phone to call the airline. She quickly said yes, and
the patient called, finding out that the flight was indeed scheduled to de-
part. When he returned to his seat, he noted, “It was sweet of you to allow
me to use your phone.” He then said that he had two things he wanted to
mention to her before the session was over. He brought up the first issue,
which didn’t seem that pressing. The therapist’s mind wandered as she
wondered why she had allowed him to use the phone, since he probably
had a cell phone and since there was a pay phone right outside the build-
ing. Suddenly her attention returned and she heard him say the following
words: “I mean, here is this beautiful, caring woman that God puts in my
life. I know I can’t really have her—it’s not right to date your therapist,
but I just wish so much...”
Suddenly Dr. D turned red and thought to herself, “My God. He’s talk-
ing about me!” She gathered herself and made the following comment to
the patient: “I’m glad you’re able to feel secure enough in here to bring
feelings like this into the process. It’s very common to develop a variety
of feelings toward your therapist, including loving ones.” She was nodding
reassuringly but could feel that her face was a bright crimson. This ex-
change occurred at the end of the session, and the patient quickly stressed
that he needed to get to the airport. Both of them raced to the door, al-
most tripping over one another.
When Mr. C came to the next session, he began by saying, “I hope it
was OK that I brought up those feelings for you last time.” He didn’t seem
to have noticed her blushing, but he did seem concerned that maybe he
shouldn’t have brought up the subject.
Dr. D responded, “Of course it was. Therapy is a place where you can
say anything without having to censor your thoughts. Besides, by explor-
ing feelings that you have for me, we may understand more about your
relationships in general.”
This time the patient blushed: “It seems like a pattern, doesn’t it?”
The therapist said, “Well, you’ve been dating physicians, women with
the same occupation I have, and finding them insufficiently responsive to
you. Maybe what’s happening here is analogous to the pattern outside of


--- PAGE 81 ---
66
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
here. You fall for professional women who really can’t respond to you in
the way you’d like them to.”
In this vignette, the therapist postponed interpretation of the erotic
transference until it was so close to awareness that she didn’t need to de-
liver the interpretation; the patient acknowledged it himself. When the
patient did verbalize his feelings, Dr. D was discombobulated by them
and was obviously embarrassed in such a way that the patient probably
noted her blushing—unconsciously if not consciously. Many therapists
become flustered when a patient says, “I love you,” or “I’m attracted to you.”
Dr. D recovered nicely from her embarrassment and was able to make pro-
ductive use of the erotic transference in the following session. She didn’t
need to interpret it, since it was already conscious, but she did interpret
the link between his dating unavailable professional women outside the
therapy and his longing for the therapist.
Interpretation may also address the architecture of resistance. Thera-
pists may make their patients aware of how they use defenses and what
they are defending against. In other words, they may point out specific
fears and fantasies that suffuse the process and that often apply to the de-
veloping transference.
The extent to which a psychodynamic therapy process is more expres-
sive or exploratory rather than supportive is based not only on the num-
ber of interpretive interventions but also on the degree to which the fo-
cus is on transference issues.
The degree of expressive versus supportive emphasis in the therapy is
related to the frequency of sessions as well. In general, a therapy that is
designed to be more expressive places greater emphasis on the transfer-
ence and will occur 2–3 times weekly, whereas supportive therapy can be
once weekly or less. By increasing the frequency of sessions, the transfer-
ence intensifies, so it can be a central target of interventions by the ther-
apist. Long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy is extremely difficult to
do at frequencies less than once a week, because the continuity from ses-
sion to session becomes disrupted and because it is difficult to focus on
transference issues at lesser frequencies.
At times it is advisable to avoid interpreting the transference. If the pa-
tient’s transference is predominantly positive and facilitates the work, some
therapists will choose not to interpret it or explore it because of the basic
principle of “if it’s not broken, don’t fix it.” A useful guideline is that the
transference needs to be interpreted when it becomes a resistance to the process.
Negative transference may be one of the most obvious examples. If a pa-
tient is showing up late for the sessions, refusing to reflect on the therapist’s
observations, and generally not making progress, the therapist may choose


--- PAGE 82 ---
Therapeutic Interventions
67
to provide insight about what is happening with an interpretation such as
the following: “I’ve been wondering if your tendency to come late here and
not reflect on the observations I make could be related to experiencing me
as though I’m your father. You’ve told me so often that you couldn’t listen
to anything he had to say.” If this intervention is accurate, the patient may
begin to consider how his experience of the therapist is so much like that
of his father that he feels he cannot allow the therapy to help him.
Some therapists will focus primarily on extratransference situations
because the patient finds it extremely uncomfortable to talk about feelings
for the therapist. Many of the same conflicts that appear in the relation-
ship with the therapist also appear in outside relationships. Psychoana-
lysts and psychoanalytic therapists often tend to glamorize transference
work, as though exploration of relationships outside the transference
won’t be as productive. This bias may lead therapists to force the patient
to look at transference issues when they’re not ready to do so. Some pa-
tients find it too shameful and embarrassing to talk about “here-and-now”
feelings directly in front of the therapist. Moreover, therapists should al-
ways keep in mind that transference is not an end in itself but is rather a
means to an end. We use the transference to help the patient understand
significant relationships outside the therapy.
Extratransference interpretations may be extremely useful for provid-
ing insight into relationships with romantic partners, children, parents,
and other significant individuals. A young man who was chronically smol-
dering with resentment about the way his boss treated him described the
relationship with uncanny similarity to his description of his relationship
with his father. However, he had not made the link between the two, so
the therapist pointed this out to him: “Each time you talk about how much
you resent your boss’s control over you, you remind me so much of how
you talk about your relationship with your dad.”
Transferences vary in the course of the psychotherapy. Whereas in
classical psychoanalytic thinking, great emphasis was placed on the trans-
ference neurosis, this conceptual model has changed considerably. The
transference neurosis was a construct that assumed that all the patient’s
conflicts, defenses, and relationship patterns from childhood would come
into focus with the figure of the analyst in one predominant transference
paradigm. In fact, most patients manifest a number of transferences in
the course of psychotherapy. In an extended process, patients may expe-
rience the therapist as a father, a mother, a sibling, or—with an older pa-
tient—even a child. Moreover, with each of these transferences, the af-
fective quality may vary from time to time. Feelings of love may alternate
with feelings of hate, envy, indifference, or anger. Patients may also go
through a variety of different types of positive and negative transferences.


--- PAGE 83 ---
68
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Noninterpretive Interventions
Much of what a therapist does in dynamic psychotherapy is noninterpre-
tive. Looking at the continuum depicted in Figure 4–1, the next most ex-
pressive intervention after interpretation is observation.
Observation stops short of interpretation in that it doesn’t include at-
tempts to explain or link. The therapist merely notes a behavior, the se-
quence of a comment, a flash of affect, or a pattern within the therapy.
The motive or explanation is left untouched, with the hope that the pa-
tient will reflect on the meaning of the therapist’s observation. A therapist
might, for example, note, “You teared up when I asked about your sister,”
or “I notice that you always avoid eye contact with me when you leave,” or
“I don’t know if you’re aware of it, but you always change the subject when
I make connections to your father’s abandonment of you.”
Confrontation generally involves an attempt to draw a patient’s atten-
tion to something that is being avoided. Unlike observation, which usu-
ally targets something outside the patient’s conscious awareness, confron-
tation usually points out the avoidance of conscious material. Because
confrontation may be aggressive, some beginning therapists are reluctant
to use such interventions, thinking that it might result in the patient quit-
ting therapy. A good example of a confrontation is bringing up the bill: “I
noticed that you haven’t paid your bill for 3 months. What are your plans
for doing something about that?” However, confrontations can also involve
turning the patient’s attention to an avoided subject with empathy and
gentleness. A patient who had recently lost her mother came to therapy
on the day after Mother’s Day and seemed particularly down. The ther-
apist made the gentle observation: “I noticed you haven’t told me how
you felt on your first Mother’s Day since your mother passed away.” The
patient then broke down in tears and talked at length about what an aw-
ful experience it had been. Confrontation may also involve setting limits,
especially with patients who are organized at a borderline level. For ex-
ample, a therapist might say, “If you want to continue this session with me,
you’ll need to lower your voice, because I can’t think when you scream.”
Clarification is the next intervention on the continuum. This interven-
tion is a way of bringing clarity to issues that are vague, diffuse, or discon-
nected. It can be a way of helping the patient recognize a pattern or of
checking the correctness of a therapist’s understanding with a patient. A
therapist might say, “If I understand you correctly, every time you are in-
volved with a man, you start to have the feeling of being used and want
to break off the relationship before it gets any worse. Is that right?” Clar-
ification can also be a way of summarizing key points of information that
the patient is making by repackaging what the patient has said (Gabbard


--- PAGE 84 ---
Therapeutic Interventions
69
2000). For example, the therapist might clarify a narrative account a pa-
tient has given: “So what I hear you saying is that when you went to the
party, each time you tried to strike up a conversation with a woman, you
felt that you were seen as undesirable and the women were more inter-
ested in other men.” Still another form of clarification is simply checking
on details of history or the recounting of a recent event: “Excuse me for in-
terrupting, but I need to clarify something: Did your mother and father
always drink that much at dinner, or was that an unusual situation?”
Toward the supportive end of the continuum, one finds interventions
like encouragement to elaborate and empathic validation. Both may be used
extensively as a way of gathering information and promoting a solid ther-
apeutic alliance. Encouragement to elaborate can involve simple com-
ments like, “Can you tell me more about that?” It can also occur when a
patient falls silent: “I noticed you stopped in the middle of your sentence.
I’m curious about what made you stop. Can you elaborate?” Empathic val-
idation comes from a perspective in which the therapist tries to immerse
herself in the patient’s internal state. An effort is made to see the patient’s
internal world from the patient’s perspective. This allows for the patient
to feel understood and validated with comments such as, “I can appreci-
ate why you would feel so horrible when your mother refused to com-
ment on such an outstanding report card.” Empathic validation may be
particularly important early in the therapy because it helps the patient
feel understood and paves the way for a strong therapeutic alliance.
Another form of empathic validation is to tell the patient, “You have
every right to feel hurt when someone treats you that way.” These affir-
mative interventions are especially useful with patients who have ex-
perienced childhood trauma but had their feelings about that trauma
invalidated. Killingmo (1995) defines an affirmative intervention as “a
communication which removes doubt about the experience of reality
and thereby re-establishes a feeling of identity” (p. 503).
A 29-year-old female patient, who had been an incest victim of her stepfa-
ther, had repeatedly told her mother what was going on, and her mother
insisted that she was lying. Hence, when she had feelings of despair about
the incestuous situation, she felt she could not go to her mother because
her feelings would be invalidated. It was of great value in the psychotherapy
for the therapist to repeatedly state that the patient’s feelings made sense
and were completely understandable in light of what she’d been through.
Although empathic validation is frequently associated with self psychol-
ogy, since Kohut (1971) emphasized empathy as the cornerstone of tech-
nique, all theoretical models in dynamic psychotherapy require some de-
gree of empathic validation to make the patient feel understood and helped.


--- PAGE 85 ---
70
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Therapists learn the hard way that one cannot rush in too quickly with
interpretations and confrontations of transference material. Many patients
require preparation for transference work with other interventions. Espe-
cially with patients who have borderline personality disorder or who are
otherwise struggling with various types of ego weakness, transference inter-
pretation is a high-risk, high-gain intervention (Gabbard et al. 1994). If the
timing is correct, patients can use transference interpretation to understand
how the pattern occurring in the therapy is similar to patterns in other rela-
tionships. However, transference interpretation can be viewed as an attack
if the proper holding environment hasn’t been created first with a series of
empathically validating comments that make the patient feel understood.
When it comes from out of the blue and the patient does not feel prepared
for it, he or she may feel criticized and persecuted by the therapist. Moni-
toring how the therapeutic alliance fluctuates in response to transference
work can be an effective way of monitoring the usefulness of transference
interpretation (Horwitz et al. 1996). Patients who bring in new material or
who collaboratively work with the therapist on the insight are responding
with an improved therapeutic alliance. Those who shut down or get furious
may be responding with a deterioration of the therapeutic alliance.
At the supportive end of the continuum, one finds psychoeducational in-
terventions and the giving of praise and advice. These interventions are much
more common in supportive psychotherapy, but some patients require these
interventions from time to time in expressive forms of psychotherapy. A
psychoeducational intervention involves teaching the patient about the in-
formation the therapist possesses by dint of professional training. A clinician
might, for example, explain to a patient that depression tends to be a disor-
der characterized by recurring episodes. Praise is designed to reinforce con-
structive and positive behaviors or attitudes. Advice involves the offering of
the therapist’s opinion about a matter of concern to the patient or therapist.
One way of predicting transference developments is to listen carefully to
the patient’s experience of previous treaters. Even perceptions of authority
figures who are not therapists may give the therapist strong clues about what
is to come. Patients who talk about how much pain they had at the dentist’s
office and how unfeeling the dentist was may eventually come to view the
therapist similarly. However, transferences also vary according to the real
characteristics of the professional, and it would be premature and clumsy to
jump in immediately with a comment like, “I wonder if you also feel that I
am inducing pain here and am equally unresponsive.” Therapists should give
the transference time to build, fleshing out evidence for it by listening to ac-
counts of other relationships and observing direct data in the therapeutic re-
lationship, before drawing those connections. Beginning therapists are often
overzealous in their wish to jump onto the transference with both feet.


--- PAGE 86 ---
Therapeutic Interventions
71
Gender Constellation and Transference
Four gender constellations are possible in dynamic psychotherapy: male
therapist–female patient, female therapist–male patient, male therapist–
male patient, and female therapist–female patient. Although it was once
believed that the sex of the therapist made little difference—since all re-
lationship paradigms would emerge over time no matter what the gender
constellation—a more recent consensus is that gender can make consid-
erable difference in the unfolding of the therapy. Transference is based
on internal object relationships that were laid down in neural networks
early in life (Westen and Gabbard 2002). These involve a self, an object,
and an affect connecting the two. Real characteristics of the therapist will
trigger one neural network of representations rather than another. Features
of the analyst—such as gender, age, appearance, manner, way of speaking,
clothing, and hair color—will trigger conscious and unconscious associa-
tions in the patient’s neural networks. Whether the patient is female or
male will make a great deal of difference regarding the development of
transferences, because gender is likely to be one of the major triggers that
activates a particular neural network constituting an object representa-
tion (Westen and Gabbard 2002).
A female therapist might trigger an immediate negative transference if
a patient has had a particularly conflictual relationship with her mother
during childhood. In such cases, the patient may be better off with a male
therapist because a male therapist’s characteristics may be less likely to ac-
tivate the emotional turmoil associated with the neural network of repre-
sentations regarding the mother. Many patients explicitly ask for a man or
a woman because they intuitively know they will get along a lot better with
that particular gender. Some transferences eventually emerge regardless of
the gender constellation, but not all of the object relationships etched in
neural networks will necessarily be triggered by every therapist. These con-
siderations must be taken into account when assigning a therapist.
Therapists should also keep in mind that as dynamic psychotherapy
deepens, gender and even sexual orientation become quite fluid in the
therapeutic relationship. A female patient may experience her female
therapist as her father at times and might react as though the therapist is
the father. A straight male patient may have sexual feelings for a male
therapist. The counterpart of this gender fluidity is in the countertrans-
ference. Female therapists who consider themselves heterosexual may
find themselves attracted to a woman patient, for example.
Gender stereotypes also get activated in the therapy because they exist
in the culture at large. A male patient may feel in a “one down” position
with a female therapist and may be deeply distressed by this power differ-


--- PAGE 87 ---
72
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
ential. He may become seductive and regard his therapist as a sexual object
as a way of reversing the power imbalance and restoring the cultural ste-
reotype of the man as the dominant member of a male-female dyad. Erotic
transferences can be much more difficult for female therapists with male
patients because of their greater sense of vulnerability in the face of male
aggression. A female therapist can feel quite unsafe in a room with an un-
stable male patient who is sexually aroused by her. The following example
illustrates the potential for problems in this gender constellation:
Mr. E, a 28-year-old man, was referred to Dr. F, a 29-year-old female psy-
chiatric resident. Mr. E was seen in weekly psychotherapy for problems
involving mood lability, angry outbursts, and a possible sleep problem.
About 4 months into the therapy, Mr. E asked if he could tape sessions
with a hand-held recorder. Although Dr. F felt somewhat uncomfortable,
she allowed him to go ahead with the taping. He became increasingly sus-
picious as time went on, and he told Dr. F that his boss and coworkers
were talking about him behind his back. He got quite angry at his boss,
who was a married woman to whom he felt a great deal of attraction. He
eventually made a pass at his boss, who refused his overture and told him
that they were “just good friends.”
About the same time that Mr. E approached his boss, he told Dr. F that
he had strong feelings for her that distracted him from the therapy. Al-
though Dr. F was flustered by his profession of attraction, she managed to
convey her appreciation for his honesty and said they should continue dis-
cussing it. Between this session and the next, she realized that he often
made comments about her hair or clothing and made inquiries into what
she would be doing over the weekend.
At the next session, Mr. E said to Dr. F after fumbling for words for a
few minutes, “If I reveal my feelings, you should reciprocate. I need to
know if I have to kill these feelings.” Dr. F responded, “The frustration
must be very great right now.” Several moments of silence passed, then
Mr. E recounted a history of attraction to inaccessible women, including
a college professor on whom he still had a crush. Dr. F felt some degree
of threat from his insistence that the feelings should be reciprocated, and
she asked him if he had noticed her engagement ring. She realized in ret-
rospect that it was an error, but she felt cornered by his insistence.
Mr. E became angry and accused Dr. F of allowing his feelings to de-
velop when she was already with someone else. He looked menacing and
said, “Aren’t you supposed to pick up on these things?” She blurted out
that she had not encountered this circumstance before. Realizing her er-
ror, she expressed confidence that the two of them could process even the
most uncomfortable issues together. She told him that a declaration of his
feelings was evidence of progress. He continued therapy with her and
continued to talk about the attraction in therapy. Dr. F pointed out how
his attraction to her had kept him from disclosing certain information in
the service of trying to appear more appealing to her.
Mr. E began making numerous phone calls to Dr. F’s voice mail. He
reported an emergency on one of these voice mail messages, in which he


--- PAGE 88 ---
Therapeutic Interventions
73
asked Dr. F to call back. On returning his call, she discovered that he had
severed ties with his family earlier in the day. She empathized with how
much he was suffering, but she said this was not an emergency that war-
ranted contact between sessions. Mr. E complained at the next session
that he felt abandoned and wanted more time with her. She declined to
extend the hour but said they could devote their next session to his con-
cerns. He then left another voice mail message conveying rage and de-
manding that she apologize for not doing her job. He also accused her of
breaking confidentiality and talking to his parents about him. Dr. F felt
increasingly threatened and spoke with her supervisor. She even canceled
the next session because she was afraid to see him alone, and she had the
director of the training clinic call him on the phone with her so she could
feel safer about the ongoing contacts with him. The clinic director em-
phasized that Mr. E was behaving in a way that was threatening to Dr. F
and encouraged her to bring that up in the next appointment.
Before the next appointment, Dr. F experienced a harrowing dream in
which she was pursued around her home by a dark figure who ultimately
overtook her. The next morning before leaving for to work, she put a can
of pepper spray into her handbag because of her sense of being threat-
ened. Realizing how intense her fear had become, she once again called
Mr. E and arranged for a phone visit in place of the clinic appointment
since she was feeling frightened.
After the intervention involving the clinic director and after Dr. F
made it clear to Mr. E that she felt threatened and frightened by him, he
calmed down a bit and agreed to take medication for his paranoid think-
ing and impaired reality testing. However, Dr. F began scheduling his ap-
pointments in midafternoon instead of late afternoon so she would feel
more secure and comfortable with him during the sessions.
This clinical illustration reflects how certain forms of transference are
not easily amenable to interpretive work. Dr. F needed to set clear limits
and even bring in her clinic director as a way of confronting what was going
on. These noninterpretive interventions, especially limit-setting confronta-
tion, brought the transference under control so the patient could talk in
therapy without presenting a threat to the therapist. She also used some
limited self-disclosure in letting the patient know that she was frightened
by him. Self-disclosure, while not usually considered a formal interven-
tion in dynamic therapy, can be valuable in such cases. This case also illus-
trates how transferences are multilayered. When we talk about a transfer-
ence as being positive, that is rarely the whole picture. One regularly finds
a good deal of anger or aggression underneath the surface of an erotic trans-
ference, particularly when the erotic overtures appear to be thwarted. A
basic premise of psychodynamic therapy is that the therapist must re-
main somewhat skeptical about the face value of feelings, transferences,
and perceptions. One always looks beneath the surface for complexity
and ambivalence.


--- PAGE 89 ---
74
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Summary
Neutrality, anonymity, and abstinence are now considered principles of
questionable value, and most contemporary dynamic therapists exercise
restraint while also recognizing that it is impossible to keep one’s own
subjectivity entirely out of the therapeutic process. Although it is impor-
tant to create a feeling of a spontaneous dialogue between therapist and
patient, beginning therapists may also find it useful to have a conceptual
model of interventions that serves as a useful guideline on what to say and
when to say it.
The most expressive interventions in the expressive-supportive contin-
uum are interpretation, observation, and confrontation. Empathic valida-
tion and encouragement to elaborate are at a midpoint in the continuum
and are useful in promoting the therapeutic alliance. The most supportive
interventions involve advice and praise; these comments are sometimes
necessary to facilitate expressive work. The degree of expressiveness of a
therapy may also be defined by the extent to which transference is a focus
of the therapist’s interventions. However, extratransference interpretations
can be an extremely useful part of expressive therapy, since some patients
find it difficult to work within the transference.
The gender constellation of therapist and patient may be an important
factor in determining the suitability of a male versus a female therapist.
Moreover, erotic or erotized transferences may pose greater problems if
the patient is male and the therapist is female, because of the female ther-
apist’s greater sense of vulnerability to male aggression.
References
Gabbard GO: Psychodynamic Psychotherapy in Clinical Practice, 3rd Edition.
Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 2000
Gabbard GO, Wilkinson S: Management of Countertransference With Border-
line Patients. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 1994
Gabbard GO, Horwitz L, Allen JG, et al: Transference interpretation in the psy-
chotherapy of borderline patients: a high-risk, high-gain phenomenon. Harv
Rev Psychiatry 2:59–69, 1994
Horwitz L, Gabbard GO, Allen JG, et al: Borderline Personality Disorder: Tailor-
ing the Psychotherapy to the Patient. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric
Publishing, 1996
Killingmo B: Affirmation in psychoanalysis. Int J Psychoanal 76:503–518, 1995
Kohut H: The Analysis of the Self. New York, International Universities Press,
1971


--- PAGE 90 ---
Therapeutic Interventions
75
Lohser B, Newton PM: Unorthodox Freud: The View From the Couch. New
York, Guilford, 1996
Westen D, Gabbard GO: Developments in cognitive neuroscience, II: implica-
tions for theories of transference. J Am Psychoanal Assoc 50:99–134, 2002


--- PAGE 91 ---
This page intentionally left blank 


--- PAGE 92 ---
77
5
Goals and 
Therapeutic Action
One cannot formulate interventions and track the patient’s progress
without a sense of how psychodynamic therapy works. Determining the
mechanisms of therapeutic action, however, is a formidable challenge.
Where do we start? We can use outcome data to demonstrate that patients
improve in a broad range of symptomatic domains and in their overall
functioning, but how do we know how such changes are brought about?
The idea of asking the therapist these questions is fraught with prob-
lems. We therapists tend to overvalue our theories and see our therapeu-
tic results in terms of our favorite theoretical perspective. We like to
think that our exquisitely formulated interpretations lead the patient to
profound insights. However, one finding of follow-up research is that pa-
tients typically don’t place much weight on interpretive interventions or
even remember individual interpretations (Mitchell 1997). These find-
ings are a bit humbling to therapists. When they see former patients in
consultation, they often find that the patient’s fondest memories of the
treatment may be random events, such as a time when the therapist told
a joke.
Seeking answers to the questions of therapeutic action from patients,
however, may be equally problematic. Patients are probably no more able
to provide reliable assessments of what helped than are therapists. Much
of the change that occurs probably takes place unconsciously, so the con-
scious memory of important moments may be the tip of the iceberg.


--- PAGE 93 ---
78
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
A researcher would have an even more daunting task to try to isolate
which specific interventions or emotional interactions in 50–100 sessions
were critical in the process of change. The researcher also has the disad-
vantage of observing from outside the intersubjective matrix of the therapy
dyad. Moments of meaningful connection and poignant emotional reso-
nances may not appear in an audiotape transcript.
Despite the inherent complexities in figuring out how dynamic ther-
apy works, we are gaining increasing knowledge about these mechanisms
through empirical research in both psychotherapy and neuroscience and
by careful study of psychotherapy process. For many years, the delivery
of insight through interpretation was viewed as the primary arrow in the
therapist’s quiver. Now most clinicians and researchers feel that insight
through interpretation has historically been idealized and that change
also occurs through the experience of a new kind of relationship in psycho-
therapy.
This either/or polarization of insight versus relationship has given way
in recent years to the recognition that these two mechanisms of change
operate synergistically in most cases (Cooper 1989; Gabbard 2000b;
Jacobs 1990; Pine 1998; Pulver 1992). The field no longer dwells on a
sharp demarcation between relational and interpretive aspects of thera-
peutic action. Insight into aspects of the relationship itself that are cor-
rective may foster further change, and the content of interpretive com-
ments may at times be less important than their relational meanings
transmitted in the course of the interpretation (Pulver 1992; Stern et al.
1998). There is now a general acknowledgement in the field that the
search for a single mode of therapeutic action in dynamic therapy is no
longer useful, since the mechanisms of change will always be individual-
ized according to characteristics of both the patient and the therapist
(Pine 1998).
Goals
Attempting to determine the specific mechanisms of action takes us into
murkier waters, because defining therapeutic action requires some uni-
formity in conceptualizing the aims or goals of psychodynamic therapy.
Goals are to therapeutic action as the destination of a journey is to the
vehicle designed to take us there. For some destinations an automobile
will suffice, whereas for others a plane or a boat may be necessary. And
here we immediately encounter a problem: the psychotherapeutic jour-
ney has a multiplicity of destinations, depending on the patient and on
the theoretical perspective of the therapist (Gabbard 2001).


--- PAGE 94 ---
Goals and Therapeutic Action
79
Goals are shaped by the psychotherapist’s theory of how therapy
works. Some theories are more in the domain of the medical model of
symptom removal, while others have to do with assignment of mean-
ings and enhanced experience of the self. Although an attempt to catalog
all the diverse goals within the field of psychoanalytic therapy would re-
quire an entire volume, it might be useful to provide a sampling of this
diversity to illustrate how the goals of treatment are commonly con-
strued.
Some Goals of Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
• Resolution of conflict.
Ego psychologists understand conflicts and
symptoms as growing out of compromise formations. The aim of dy-
namic therapy would be to explore the nature of the unconscious con-
flicts and to resolve the symptoms they produce. Thus, a young man
may have writer’s block because he fears that his success will put him
into dangerous competition with his father. When this conflict has
been explored and understood, the young man may be able to write,
because his anxiety has been diminished by his understanding of its
origin. Conflicts are not regarded as being completely eliminated in
this formulation, but more effective and adaptive compromise forma-
tions are instituted (Brenner 1976).
• A search for truth.
Some dynamic therapists see the goal of the ther-
apeutic process as self-knowledge. Guided by the age-old exhortation
to “know thyself,” therapists of this persuasion guide their patients to
take an unflinching look at themselves and to recognize who they are
as opposed to who they want to be. This may take the form of identi-
fying the distinction that Winnicott (1962/1976) made between the
true self and the false self. The outcome of therapy should result in feel-
ings of “living in one’s own skin” and of being authentic (Gabbard
1996).
• An improved capacity to seek out appropriate selfobjects.
Writing
from a self psychological perspective, Kohut (1984) argued that we
never outgrow the need for others to perform certain functions for us,
including mirroring, affirmation, validation, and idealization. As noted
in Chapter 1 (“Key Concepts”), Kohut called these selfobject functions,
and he maintained that they are as necessary to survival as oxygen in
the atmosphere. The goal of psychoanalytic therapy would be to help
patients move from a position of using selfobjects in an immature or
maladaptive way to one of using them in a more mature and appropri-
ate way.


--- PAGE 95 ---
80
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
• Improved relationships as a result of a gain in understanding about
one’s internal object relationships.
 Therapists of an object relations
or relational orientation will see the primary goal of therapy as being
the acquisition of an understanding of how one’s internal self and
other representations shape interactions with people in the external
world. One part of this goal would be to help patients reintegrate as-
pects of themselves that they repeatedly project into others. For exam-
ple, a woman patient who reacts to her female therapist as though the
therapist would be envious of any type of success may learn that these
fantasies stem from an internal representation of her mother, who
seemed lacking in enthusiasm whenever the patient succeeded in aca-
demic endeavors. Gradually the patient recognizes that her view of her
therapist as envious is a projection of a maternal representation within
herself. A process of reintegration or “re-owning” takes place so that
the patient recognizes what belongs to her and what belongs to others
(Steiner 1989). The result is improved relationships. One way to view
this transformation would be that the patient is more capable of living
in the world instead of in fantasy.
• The generation of meaning within the therapeutic dialogue.
New
meanings emerge as a result of psychotherapeutic exploration. Dynamic
therapists today are less likely to search for the meaning, in the sense
of the one correct interpretation of events or experiences. Instead, the
two participants in the psychotherapy work to construct meanings to-
gether in the course of the process (Mitchell 1997). There is a dialec-
tical tension between discovering unconscious meanings that have been
there a long time and creating meanings through the therapeutic dia-
logue where both therapist and patient contribute. This goal is a vari-
ation on making the unconscious conscious in the sense that the result
is a person who has a greater grasp of meanings that were formerly elu-
sive and outside of awareness.
• Improved reflective functioning.
With patients who have had their ca-
pacity to mentalize impaired through early traumatic or neglectful expe-
riences, improving reflective functioning may be a major goal. At the end
of the therapy, the patient would be expected to have the capacity to dif-
ferentiate between an internal representation of someone and the way
the person is in external reality. Moreover, the patient should be able to
have a sense of another person’s internal world and recognize that it is dif-
ferent from one’s own. This awareness of two separate minds interacting
with one another is also referred to as the achievement of intersubjectiv-
ity (Benjamin 1990). An improved capacity to mentalize allows patients
to recognize how their behaviors are generated through internal feelings,
beliefs, conflicts, and motivations, rather than occurring randomly.


--- PAGE 96 ---
Goals and Therapeutic Action
81
This brief survey of various goals of psychoanalytic therapy reflects con-
scious theoretical conceptualizations of what happens in treatment. We
must also take into account that therapists are never free from their own
unconscious agendas. We go into the field partly because of conscious and
altruistic wishes to help people. However, like our patients, factors be-
yond our awareness shape our decisions. We may be unconsciously at-
tempting to repair our own internal objects or our parents; we may be
seeking an exclusive special relationship with a patient that provides some-
thing for us that we missed in childhood; we may be attempting to make
the patient love us or idealize us to make up for perceived failures in our
parents; or we may try to bring the patient under our omnipotent control
for purposes that are not necessarily in the patient’s best interest (Gab-
bard 1995). Those who choose to spend a good deal of their professional
careers conducting dynamic therapy may wish to seek their own personal
treatment to elucidate some of these motives that are unclear and to gain
a greater grasp of what roles they are casting on their patients. We can
never be entirely sure what we are up to in any psychotherapy process,
and there is no substitute for ongoing self-scrutiny and self-analysis. Dy-
namic therapists may have an unconscious fantasy of establishing a partic-
ular kind of dyad that will make the therapist feel good at the end of the
workday. For example, some therapists may have a specific form of object
relationship in mind involving a selfless, devoted helper and an apprecia-
tive patient who acknowledges having been helped (Gabbard 2000a).
Patient’s Goals Versus Therapist’s Goals
Patients come to therapy with their own theories of etiology and patho-
genesis. They may have specific goals in mind that are entirely unrealistic
from the therapist’s standpoint. A gay male patient came to therapy com-
plaining that he had had a series of painful romantic relationships with part-
ners who had betrayed him and mistreated him. When his therapist asked
him about his goals for therapy, he said that he was tired of being mis-
treated. The therapist responded that the two of them would be unable
to influence how his partners treated him for the most part, but a reason-
able goal was to explore why he got involved with certain types of part-
ners who ended up breaking his heart.
The goals of the patient might conflict with those of the therapist, be-
cause the two individuals conceptualize the process differently. Many pa-
tients approach psychotherapy with the expectation that they will be
“fixed” by active interventions from the therapist. The therapist must dis-
abuse them of that notion and help them see that their goals have to be
jointly defined and collaboratively pursued. Moreover, whereas therapists


--- PAGE 97 ---
82
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
may be more inclined to think of intrapsychic goals, such as “strengthen-
ing the ego” and “superego modification,” patients are more likely to
think of goals in terms of life changes. Compromises have to be reached
in the formulation of the goals. A patient who says her goal is a satisfying
romantic relationship leading to marriage has every right to seek that in
life. However, the therapist can’t realistically promise that she will find a
suitable partner and end up happily married following therapy. The ther-
apist can, however, offer the possibility of exploring the patient’s con-
flicts about intimacy, her inhibitions about giving herself fully to another
person, and any problematic relational styles that might interfere with
her romantic pursuit.
As the therapy proceeds, therapist and patient must reevaluate goals
from time to time. Patients may begin with one set of concerns and ex-
pectations only to find that these are gradually modified with the greater
understanding brought to bear from the psychotherapist. A young man
who presents with problems finding a fulfilling job might identify his goal
as being able to work in a gratifying occupation. As he gets increasing in-
sight from the psychotherapy process, he may recognize that he is highly
conflicted about leaving home and growing up, leading to a redefinition
of his goal as one of psychological separation from his family of origin. Some
conflicts might be entirely unconscious and therefore are not available for
the initial discussion on the setting of goals.
One cautionary note that needs to be stressed about goals in psycho-
therapy is that too much emphasis on the pursuit of goals can lead pa-
tients to rebel against what they see as the therapist’s agenda for them.
Even worse, a therapist who insists on the attainment of specific goals
may foster a “false self” compliance in which the patient professes to have
changed in order to please the therapist. Paradoxically, the therapist who
is too concerned about the achievement of goals may promote a transfer-
ence-countertransference impasse in which the patient defeats the ther-
apist’s efforts, thereby winning by losing (Gabbard 2000a).
Hence there may be value in allowing for substantial periods of time
when patients are allowed to be somewhat aimless or goalless during the
therapy (Holmes 1998; Mitchell 1997). Certain patients who are riddled
with envy and are incapable of acknowledging help from the therapist
may need to demonstrate their freedom from the therapist’s expectations
by being without goals and simply engaging in self-exploration for some
time. Other patients allow themselves to change only after termination of
the therapy as a way of depriving the therapist of the gratification of see-
ing them change (Gabbard 2000a). Thus, for many patients some bal-
ance between a pursuit of goals and goallessness may be necessary for an
optimal therapeutic climate.


--- PAGE 98 ---
Goals and Therapeutic Action
83
Multiple Modes of Therapeutic Action
In an era in which it is widely acknowledged that there are multiple
modes of therapeutic action, we should probably speak in terms of “ther-
apeutic actions” instead of “therapeutic action” (Gabbard and Westen
2003). We now know that different patients use different aspects of the
treatment to facilitate change. A skilled therapist is sufficiently flexible
to be able to shift approaches based on the needs of the particular patient
in a given psychotherapy process. Wallerstein (1986) studied the 42 pa-
tients in the Menninger Psychotherapy Research Project for a span of 30
years. He found that in a number of cases with good outcomes, the ther-
apists had modified their approach from a highly expressive mode to a
more supportive strategy. He noted that insight is often idealized but that
supportive treatment appeared to produce as much structural change
with as much durability as did highly expressive or exploratory therapies.
In a reexamination of the same patient group, Blatt (1992) found that
the psychotherapeutic approach to these patients had to be varied, based
on the nature of the patient’s psychopathology (Table 5–1). He divided
the patients into two groups: 1) patients with introjective pathology, who
were more ideational, were primarily concerned with the development
and maintenance of the self concept, and who viewed intimate relation-
ships as secondary or peripheral; and 2) those with anaclitic psychopathol-
ogy, who were much more concerned about relationship issues than about
the development of the self. This latter group used avoidant defenses—such
as denial, disavowal, displacement, and repression—whereas the introjective
group tended to use defenses like intellectualization, reaction formation,
and rationalization. In examining the treatments of the two groups, Blatt
noted that the anaclitic group appeared to be less responsive to insight
through interpretation but that they gained considerable benefit from the
therapeutic relationship itself. The introjective patients, on the other hand,
seemed to respond with much greater improvement to insight and inter-
pretation.
Blatt’s distinction is useful, but therapists should keep in mind that
many patients will have mixtures of these features and will benefit from
both the relationship and insight. In many cases, patients will value an in-
creased sense of mastery and agency as well as an increased capacity for
intimate relationships with others. Jones (1997, 2000) developed an in-
tegrated model of therapeutic action that takes into account both inter-
pretation and interaction occurring in the relationship, which he termed
repetitive interaction structure. In this model, therapeutic action occurs in
the recognition, understanding, and experience by both members of the
treatment dyad of a repetitive pattern of interactions.


--- PAGE 99 ---
84
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Table 5–1.
Features of introjective versus anaclitic psychopathology
Characteristic
Introjective patients
Anaclitic patients
Motivation
Primarily concerned with self-development; intimate 
relationships viewed as secondary
Primarily concerned with the development and 
maintenance of relationships; self-
development viewed as secondary
Primary defense mechanisms
Intellectualization, reaction formation, rationalization
Denial, disavowal, displacement, repression
Mode of therapeutic action
Insight through interpretation
The therapeutic relationship itself
Source.
Based on Blatt 1992.


--- PAGE 100 ---
Goals and Therapeutic Action
85
Contributions From Neuroscience
Recent developments in cognitive neuroscience help us articulate how
change occurs and what the therapist must do to facilitate change. Al-
though the goals of different therapists with different theoretical orien-
tations may be quite different, almost all of them can be partially under-
stood in terms of altering unconscious associational networks (Gabbard
and Westen 2003). Among these unconscious associational networks are
those that trigger problematic defensive strategies, those that trigger
problematic interpersonal patterns, and those that underlie problematic
emotional reactions. One obvious target of associative change would be
the unconscious connection between a feeling state and an object repre-
sentation. For example, someone may fear that authority figures will al-
ways be angry and retaliatory. A second type of associative network in-
volves unconscious wishes that others will behave in a certain way. A third
type is unconscious pathogenic beliefs that control what the patient does.
A patient might, for example, believe that if she allows herself to express
anger, there will be no one left to love her. Yet another target of associa-
tive change involves the style of defenses one uses to regulate emotional
states.
Whether the goal is to alter unconscious fantasies, defenses, patho-
genic beliefs, or problematic links between feelings and object repre-
sentations, the change in functioning of associational networks generally
involves specific processes (Gabbard and Westen 2003). The first is a
weakening of links between nodes of a network that have been activated
together for years or decades and a general lowering of their level of
chronic activation. Representations are not “things” stored in memory
but are connections among mental units (ideas, memories, sensations, and
affects) that “fire together.” Representations can be viewed as potentials for
reactivation—that is, patterns of neural firing that occur under certain con-
ditions based on their prior levels of activation. A representation of self
or an object plays a powerful and recurrent role in a patient’s inner life.
It is a potential that has been activated many times before and exists in a
heightened state of potential. Thus, associative change means weakening
links between mental processes that have become associatively linked.
The second process involves structural changes in associative networks
that create new associative linkages, or the strengthening of links that
were previously weak. Hence, a treatment that results in structural change
does not obliterate or completely replace old networks. Rather, lasting
change requires a relative deactivation of problematic links in activated
networks and increased activation of new, more adaptive connections so
the patient will find new, more adaptive solutions.
