

--- PAGE 26 ---
Key Concepts
11
transference through the concept of projective identification (Feldman
1997; Gabbard 1995; Joseph 1989; Ogden 1979; Spillius 1992). In projec-
tive identification, the patient unconsciously projects a self or object rep-
resentation into the therapist and then, by exerting interpersonal pressure,
“nudges” the therapist into taking on characteristics similar to the represen-
tation that has been projected. Thus the patient may behave in an irritating
way until the therapist becomes irritated and unconsciously conforms to
an angry object from the patient’s past.
Self psychology has expanded the understanding of transference by em-
phasizing that selfobject transferences involve the therapist as a comple-
tion of the patient’s self. Because the self is seen as being in a deficit state,
the transference object must fulfill functions that are not within the pa-
tient as a result of inadequate parental empathy. Thus the patient may
seek to complete the self by viewing the therapist as admiring or validat-
ing. Stolorow (1995) extended the self psychological understanding by
emphasizing that transference is fundamentally bidimensional. There is a
repetitive aspect, as Freud described, but there is also a reparative aspect in
which the patient seeks a new object experience that will be healing.
More recently, postmodern perspectives in contemporary psychoanaly-
sis—such as relational, constructivist, and interpersonal theories—have in-
fluenced the way that transference is viewed. The constructivist model of
transference (Hoffman 1998) emphasizes that the therapist’s actual behav-
ior is always influencing the patient’s experience of the therapist. From this
perspective, there are always real aspects of the interaction that are based
on the therapist’s actual characteristics that interact with the recreation of
an old object relationship from the past. Virtually all contemporary views
of transference would agree that the patient’s perception of the therapist is
always a mixture of real characteristics of the therapist and aspects of fig-
ures from the past—in effect, a combination of old and new relationships.
Countertransference
A hallmark of psychodynamic thinking is that the patient and therapist
have two separate subjectivities that interact in a meaningful way during
the course of the therapy. The psychodynamic therapist is not a scientist
looking through a microscope at a specimen. Rather, she is a fellow hu-
man being with conflicts and emotional struggles of her own. She uncon-
sciously experiences the patient as someone from her past at the same time
that the patient experiences her as someone from his past. Thus the ther-
apist’s countertransference is similar to the patient’s transference. Over
time, however, this narrow or Freudian view of countertransference has
been expanded to a broad view that regards countertransference as the


--- PAGE 27 ---
12
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
therapist’s total emotional reaction to the patient. This expanded defini-
tion has also normalized the concept so that countertransference is viewed
not just as an obstacle to helping the patient but also as a source of im-
portant information about the patient. Countertransference is now con-
sidered a major therapeutic and diagnostic tool that tells the therapist a
great deal about the patient’s internal world.
Most theoretical perspectives today view countertransference as entail-
ing a jointly created reaction in the clinician. In other words, part of the
therapist’s reaction to the patient is based on the therapist’s past relation-
ships brought into the present, as in transference. In addition, however,
other aspects of the therapist’s feelings are induced by the patient’s behavior.
Through projective identification, the patient recreates an old object rela-
tionship in which the therapist plays a principal character from the patient’s
past (Gabbard 1995). For example, if the patient makes the therapist angry,
the therapist’s anger may stem from past relationships in the therapist’s in-
ternal world while also deriving from the patient’s actual behavior that
evokes a reaction in the therapist similar to objects from the patient’s past.
Resistance
An anchoring principle in psychodynamic psychotherapy is that the pa-
tient is ambivalent about change. The patient’s intrapsychic equilibrium
has been reached after years of using specific defense mechanisms to keep
painful affects at bay. Entering therapy threatens that equilibrium, so the
patient may unconsciously oppose the treater’s efforts to produce insight
and change. The patient’s characteristic defense mechanisms, designed to
deal with unpleasant emotions, are activated by the therapy in the form
of resistance (Greenson 1967). The difference between resistances and
defense mechanisms is simply that the former can be observed by the
therapist, whereas the latter must be inferred (Thomä and Kächele 1987).
The resistance can take many forms, including silence, having nothing
to say, forgetting to pay the therapy bill, talking about superficial matters
that seem irrelevant to therapy, refusing to develop goals to work on in
therapy, coming late to appointments, forgetting to take medication, for-
getting what the therapist said, or making fun of the therapist’s interven-
tions.
Many resistances are transference resistances. Patients may oppose a ther-
apy because of specific fantasies about how the therapist is viewing them.
Patients may not tell their therapist their most shameful secrets because
of a conviction that the therapist will humiliate them and criticize them
for revealing these secrets. The manner in which a patient resists is likely
to be a recreation of a past relationship that continues to influence vari-


--- PAGE 28 ---
Key Concepts
13
ous present-day relationships. Hence resistance is not simply an obstacle to
be removed from the therapy. It is a revelation of a highly significant in-
ternal object relationship from the patient’s past transported into the
present moment with the treater (Friedman 1991). The therapist tries to
help the patient understand what is being recreated and how it influences
the patient’s capacity to work on problems in the therapy.
Psychic Determinism
The fundamental psychoanalytic concept of psychic determinism refers
to the notion that what we do with our lives is shaped by unconscious
forces in dynamic relationship with one another. Similarly, symptoms or
behaviors generally serve several functions and solve many problems,
even though the unconscious causation is beyond our grasp. Sherwood
(1969) pointed out that “Freud clearly held that the causes of behavior
were both complex (overdetermined) and multiple (in the sense of there
being alternate sets of sufficient condition)” (p. 181). In other words, be-
haviors or symptoms are at times caused by a specific intrapsychic constel-
lation of factors that work together to produce the end result, whereas at
other times they are produced by different etiological factors. Uncon-
scious fantasies associated with pleasurable wishes or safety are often mo-
tivators that determine the way we deal with others, the way we control
painful feelings, and the way we lead our lives (Fonagy and Target 2003).
Psychiatrists understand that genetic, biological, traumatic, and social
factors also shape behavior. A patient with a brain injury may forget because
of damage to brain areas rather than for dynamically significant reasons.
Nonetheless, a psychodynamic psychotherapist believes that meanings are
attached to the consequences of genetically or socially produced symptoms
and behaviors. These meanings relate to long-standing unconscious beliefs,
thoughts, and feelings that can be usefully explored with the patient.
The Patient’s Unique Subjectivity
A final principle of psychodynamic thinking is that we don’t really know
ourselves. Because of a variety of conflicts, prohibitions, anxieties, and de-
fenses, we tend to hide from ourselves, and the task of the psychodynamic
therapist is to pursue the patient’s true self.
Winnicott (1960) noted that infants whose initiatives are consistently
thwarted by parents who cannot receive or validate them will find an alter-
native pathway to connect with their parents. This strategy usually involves
the development of a false self whom the parents recognize and appreciate.
The true self may become shrouded in shame, however, and some degree


--- PAGE 29 ---
14
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
of authenticity is lost. In psychodynamic therapy, the therapist pursues a
uniquely subjective truth for each patient. The therapist seeks to recognize
and validate the true self of the patient. This true self is rarely a monolithic
entity, however, and most patients have a multifaceted self structure that
varies with their relational setting. This search for the hidden aspect of the
patient may involve unmasking a number of self-deceptions and unflinch-
ingly exploring the patient’s most shameful fantasies, fears, and wishes. The
need to be known, validated, and recognized may be as fundamental as the
wish to understand in the course of dynamic therapy.
What Does Research Tell Us?
Psychoanalysts and psychodynamic therapists were complacent for years.
Patients lined up at their doors, so research was seen as peripheral to the
practice of the therapy. As a result, vigorous research on the outcomes of
psychoanalytic and psychodynamic treatments is relatively scarce com-
pared with the extensive research in cognitive-behavioral therapy, for ex-
ample. To be sure, there are formidable obstacles to conducting research
on extended psychodynamic treatments (Gabbard et al. 2002). The cost
of a project that would measure outcomes from treatments that last 1–5
years would be extraordinary compared with the costs of 16-week trials
of brief therapies. Finding a suitably matched control group would also
be problematic. A basic principle of psychoanalytic and psychodynamic
therapies is that the treatment must be self-selected because of the mo-
tivation necessary to engage in sometimes-painful exploration. Therefore
randomized assignment of patients to one modality versus another pre-
sents major obstacles to researchers. Similarly, in a multiyear treatment,
the number of dropouts from either the treatment group or the control
group might severely hamper meaningful statistical analyses (Gunderson
and Gabbard 1999).
A substantial body of research on brief psychodynamic therapy has pro-
vided some credibility that the principles of the treatment are sound.
Anderson and Lambert (1995) conducted a meta-analysis of 26 studies
and determined that short-term dynamic therapy was equally effective as
other therapies at follow-up. Three separate studies have demonstrated
that accurate interpretation of core conflicts predicts better treatment
outcomes within sessions and across sessions (Crits-Christoph et al. 1988;
Joyce and Piper 1993; Silberschatz et al. 1986).
When we turn to extended psychodynamic therapy, only a handful of
studies have utilized a randomized, controlled design, the gold standard
of scientific rigor. Winston et al. (1994) conducted a controlled trial of
25 patients with Cluster C personality disorders who were treated in


--- PAGE 30 ---
Key Concepts
15
dynamic therapy with a mean length of 40.3 sessions. The sample im-
proved significantly on all measures compared with control patients on a
wait list. At follow-up 1.5 years later, the patients demonstrated contin-
ued benefit.
Svartberg et al. (in press) randomly assigned 50 patients who met cri-
teria for Cluster C personality disorders to 40 sessions of either dynamic
psychotherapy or cognitive therapy. The therapists were all experienced
in manual-guided supervision. The outcomes were assessed in terms of
symptom distress, interpersonal problems, and core personality pathol-
ogy. The full sample of patients showed statistically significant improve-
ments on all measures during treatment and during the 2-year follow-up
period. Patients who received cognitive therapy did not report significant
change in symptom distress after treatment, whereas patients who under-
went dynamic therapy treatment did. Two years after the treatment, 54%
of the dynamic therapy patients and 42% of the cognitive therapy pa-
tients had recovered symptomatically. The investigators concluded that
there is reason to think that improvement persists after treatment with
dynamic psychotherapy.
In the Boston Psychotherapy Study (Stanton et al. 1984), patients with
schizophrenia who received supportive therapy were compared with those
who were provided with psychoanalytic therapy at a frequency of two or
more times a week by experienced psychoanalytically oriented therapists.
Although certain outcome measures seemed to improve differentially in
each group, overall no significant advantage was conferred on patients who
were treated with psychoanalytic therapy (Gunderson et al. 1984). Hein-
icke and Ramsey-Klee (1986) compared intensive (four times a week)
psychodynamic therapy to once-a-week sessions for children with learning
difficulties. This randomized, controlled trial involved treatments lasting
more than a year. The children who were seen once a week showed a faster
rate of improvement than those receiving four weekly sessions. At the time
of follow-up, however, the children who had four sessions per week showed
much greater improvement.
Bateman and Fonagy (1999) randomly assigned 38 patients with bor-
derline personality disorder to a psychoanalytically oriented partial hos-
pital treatment or to standard psychiatric care as a control group. The pri-
mary treatments in the partial hospital group consisted of once-weekly
individual psychoanalytic psychotherapy and three-times-weekly group
psychoanalytic psychotherapy. The control subjects received no psycho-
therapy. At the end of treatment at 18 months, the patients who received
the psychoanalytically oriented treatment showed significantly more im-
provements in depressive symptoms, social and interpersonal function-
ing, need for hospitalization, and suicidal and self-mutilating behavior.


--- PAGE 31 ---
16
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
These differences were maintained during an 18-month posttreatment
follow-up with assessments every 6 months (Bateman and Fonagy 2001).
Moreover, the treatment group continued to improve during the 18-month
follow-up period.
Other studies that did not involve randomized, controlled design also
suggest positive effects of psychoanalysis and psychoanalytic psychotherapy
(Monsen et al. 1995a, 1995b; Sandell et al. 2000; Stevenson and Meares
1992; Target and Fonagy 1994a, 1994b). An encouraging finding that is
recurrent in psychodynamic research is that follow-up measures indicate
continued improvement, suggesting that patients have learned a particular
way of thinking about their experience that they can apply on their own
following termination.
Summary
Long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy can be defined as a treatment
that focuses on thoughtfully timed interpretation of transference and re-
sistance and a sensitive appreciation of how the therapist contributes to
the interaction with the patient. For purposes of this text, the definition
of long term is a duration greater than 24 sessions or 6 months. A set of basic
theoretical models are also fundamental to dynamic therapy. These in-
clude ego psychology, object-relations theory, self psychology, and attach-
ment theory. In addition to these theoretical models, a psychodynamic
therapist is guided by a set of key concepts: 1) much of mental life is un-
conscious; 2) childhood experiences in concert with genetic factors shape
the adult; 3) the patient’s transference to the therapist is a primary source
of understanding; 4) the therapist’s countertransference provides valu-
able understanding about what the patient induces in others; 5) the pa-
tient’s resistance to the therapy process is a major focus of the therapy;
6) symptoms and behaviors serve multiple functions and are determined
by complex and often unconscious forces; and 7) a psychodynamic thera-
pist assists the patient in achieving a sense of authenticity and uniqueness.
A research base in long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy has been
slow to develop, but the findings of existing studies are encouraging.
References
Ainsworth MS, Blehar MC, Waters E, et al: Patterns of Attachment: A Psycholog-
ical Study of the Strange Situation. Hillsdale, NJ, Erlbaum, 1978
Anderson EM, Lambert MJ: Short-term dynamically oriented psychotherapy: a
review and meta-analysis. Clin Psychol Rev 15:503–514, 1995


--- PAGE 32 ---
Key Concepts
17
Barber J, Morse JQ, Krakauer ID, et al: Change in obsessive-compulsive and
avoidant personality disorders following time-limited expressive-supportive
therapy. Psychotherapy 34:133–143, 1997
Bateman A, Fonagy P: The effectiveness of partial hospitalization in the treat-
ment of borderline personality disorder: a randomized controlled trial. Am J
Psychiatry 156:1563–1569, 1999
Bateman A, Fonagy P: Treatment of borderline personality disorder with psycho-
analytically oriented partial hospitalization: an 18-month follow-up. Am J
Psychiatry 158:36–42, 2001
Benjamin J: An outline of intersubjectivity: the development of recognition. Psy-
choanalytic Psychology 7(suppl):33–46, 1990
Bowlby J: A Secure Base: Clinical Applications of Attachment Theory. London,
Routledge, 1988
Chodorow NJ: Theoretical gender and clinical gender: epistemological reflections on
the psychology of women. J Am Psychoanal Assoc 44(suppl):215–238, 1996
Crits-Christoph P, Cooper A, Luborsky L: The accuracy of therapists’ interpreta-
tions and the outcome of dynamic psychotherapy. J Consult Clin Psychol 56:
490–495, 1988
Feldman M: Projective identification: the analyst’s involvement. Int J Psychoanal
78:227–242, 1997
Fonagy P: Attachment Theory and Psychoanalysis. New York, Other Press, 2001
Fonagy P, Target M: Psychoanalytic Theories: Perspectives From Developmental
Psychopathology. London, Whurr, 2003
Freud S: The dynamics of transference (1912), in The Standard Edition of the
Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol 12. Translated and
edited by Strachey J. London, Hogarth Press, 1958, pp 97–108
Freud S: The ego and the id (1923), in The Standard Edition of the Complete
Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol 19. Translated and edited by
Strachey J. London, Hogarth Press, 1961, pp 1–66
Freud S: Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety (1926), in The Standard Edition of
the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol 20. Translated
and edited by Strachey J. London, Hogarth Press, 1959, pp 75–175
Friedman L: A reading of Freud’s papers on technique. Psychoanal Q 60:564–595,
1991
Gabbard GO: Countertransference: the emerging common ground. Int J Psycho-
anal 76:475–485, 1995
Gabbard GO: Psychodynamic Psychiatry in Clinical Practice, 3rd Edition. Wash-
ington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 2000
Gabbard GO, Gunderson JG, Fonagy P: The place of psychoanalytic treatments
within psychiatry. Arch Gen Psychiatry 59:505–510, 2002
Greenson RR: The Technique and Practice of Psychoanalysis. New York, Interna-
tional Universities Press, 1967
Gunderson JG, Gabbard GO: Making the case for psychoanalytic therapies in
the current psychiatric environment. J Am Psychoanal Assoc 47:679–704,
1999


--- PAGE 33 ---
18
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Gunderson JG, Frank AF, Katz HM, et al: Effects of psychotherapy in schizophre-
nia, II: comparative outcome of two forms of treatment. Schizophr Bull 10:
564–598, 1984
Heinicke CM, Ramsey-Klee DM: Outcome of child psychotherapy as a function
of frequency of session. J Am Acad Child Psychiatry 25:247–253, 1986
Hoffman IZ: Ritual and Spontaneity in the Psychoanalytic Process: A Dialectical-
Constructivist View. Hillsdale, NJ, Analytic Press, 1998
Joseph B: Psychic Equilibrium and Psychic Change: Selected Papers of Betty
Joseph. Edited by Feldman M, Spillius EB. London, Routledge, 1989
Joyce AS, Piper WE: The immediate impact of transference in short-term indi-
vidual psychotherapy. Am J Psychother 47:508–526, 1993
Kohut H: The Analysis of the Self: A Systematic Approach to the Psychoanalytic
Treatment of Narcissistic Personality Disorders. New York, International
Universities Press, 1971
Kohut H: The Restoration of the Self. New York, International Universities Press,
1977
Kohut H: How Does Analysis Cure? Edited by Goldberg A with the collaboration
of Stepansky PE. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press, 1984
Mental health: does therapy help? Consumer Reports, November, 1995, pp 734–739
Monsen J, Odland T, Faugli A, et al: Personality disorders: changes and stability
after intensive psychotherapy focusing on affect consciousness. Psychother
Res 5:33–48, 1995a
Monsen J, Odland T, Faugli A, et al: Personality disorders and psychosocial
changes after intensive psychotherapy: a prospective follow-up study of an
outpatient psychotherapy project, 5 years after end of treatment. Scand J
Psychol 36:256–268, 1995b
Ogden TH: On projective identification. Int J Psychoanal 60:357–373, 1979
Reiss D, Hetherington EM, Plomin R, et al: Genetic questions for environmental
studies: differential parenting and psychopathology in adolescence. Arch
Gen Psychiatry 52:925–936, 1995
Sandell R, Blomberg J, Lazar A, et al: Varieties of long-term outcome among pa-
tients in psychoanalysis and long-term psychotherapy: a review of findings
in the Stockholm Outcome of Psychoanalysis and Psychotherapy Project
(STOPP). Int J Psychoanal 81:921–942, 2000
Sherwood M: The Logic of Explanation in Psychoanalysis. New York, Academic
Press, 1969
Silberschatz G, Fretter PB, Curtis JT: How do interpretations influence the pro-
cess of psychotherapy? J Consult Clin Psychol 54:646–652, 1986
Spillius EB: Clinical experiences of projective identification, in Clinical Lectures
on Klein and Bion. Edited by Anderson R. London, Tavistock/Routledge, 1992,
pp 59–73
Squire LR: Memory and Brain. New York, Oxford University Press, 1987
Stanton AH, Gunderson JG, Knapp PH, et al: Effects of psychotherapy in schizo-
phrenia, I: design and implementation of a controlled study. Schizophr Bull
10:520–563, 1984


--- PAGE 34 ---
Key Concepts
19
Stern DN: The Interpersonal World of the Infant: A View From Psychoanalysis
and Developmental Psychology. New York, Basic Books, 1985
Stern DN: Developmental prerequisites for the sense of a narrated self, in Psycho-
analysis: Toward the Second Century. Edited by Cooper AM, Kernberg OF,
Person ES. New Haven, CT, Yale University Press, 1989, pp 168–178
Stevenson J, Meares R: An outcome study of psychotherapy for patients with bor-
derline personality disorder. Am J Psychiatry 149:355–362, 1992
Stolorow RD: An intersubjective view of self psychology. Psychoanalytic Dia-
logues 5:393–399, 1995
Svartberg M, Stiles TC, Seltzer MH: Effectiveness of short-term dynamic psycho-
therapy and cognitive therapy for Cluster C personality disorders: a random-
ized controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry (in press)
Target M, Fonagy P: The efficacy of psychoanalysis for children with emotional
disorders. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 33:361–371, 1994a
Target M, Fonagy P: The efficacy of psychoanalysis for children: prediction of
outcome in a developmental context. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry
33:1134–1144, 1994b
Thomä H, Kächele H: Psychoanalytic Practice, Vol 1: Principles. Translated by
Wilson M, Roseveare D. New York, Springer-Verlag, 1987
Westen D: The scientific status of unconscious processes: is Freud really dead?
J Am Psychoanal Assoc 47:1061–1106, 1999
Westen D, Gabbard GO: Developments in cognitive neuroscience, I: conflict,
compromise, and connectionism. J Am Psychoanal Assoc 50:53–98, 2002a
Westen D, Gabbard GO: Developments in cognitive neuroscience, II: implica-
tions for theories of transference. J Am Psychoanal Assoc 50:99–134, 2002b
Winnicott DW: Ego distortion in terms of true and false self, in The Maturational
Processes and the Facilitating Environment. New York, International Univer-
sities Press, 1965, pp 140–152
Winston A, Laikin M, Pollack J, et al: Short-term psychotherapy of personality
disorders. Am J Psychiatry 151:190–194, 1994


--- PAGE 35 ---
This page intentionally left blank 


--- PAGE 36 ---
21
2
Assessment, Indications, 
and Formulation
The success of psychodynamic psychotherapy depends on selecting pa-
tients who are truly suited for it. Treatment must always be tailored to
the patient, not the other way around. Assessing the suitability begins
with an intake or consultation meeting in which patients are allowed to
tell their own story in their own way. Two principal assessments are made:
1) Are the patient’s clinical symptoms likely to respond to long-term psy-
chodynamic psychotherapy? and 2) Does the patient have the psycholog-
ical characteristics that are suited to a psychodynamic approach? These
determinations may be complicated, though, and the suitability of some
patients may be hard to assess until they have had a good trial of therapy.
In the clinician’s mind, the intake process is designed to establish an accu-
rate psychodynamic diagnosis rather than provide treatment. From the pa-
tients’ perspective, however, it may be highly therapeutic to have someone
listen to their story and accept them as they are. Therefore the nonjudg-
mental listening that is inherent in good psychodynamic interviewing
may pave the way for a psychotherapeutic relationship to follow.
In the first meeting, the clinician may wish to orient the patient to the
purpose of an evaluation. It may be helpful to explain that before pre-
scribing any kind of treatment, a good diagnostic understanding needs to
be established. The patient should be told that more than one meeting
may be necessary to accomplish that goal.


--- PAGE 37 ---
22
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Assessment
Psychodynamic Interviewing
Psychiatric residents learning psychodynamic interviewing must, to some
extent, unlearn the medical interviewing techniques that have been in-
grained in them through years of education. Because of their anxieties
about the interview situation, patients may steer clear of a linear course
that goes from symptoms to diagnosis. Patients need to tell their story in
their own way, and a wise interviewer will let a patient ramble for a while
as a way of getting to know who the patient is and what is important to
him. The diagnostician must elicit information that allows for the develop-
ment of a descriptive diagnosis based on symptoms and history, but the
route to that end point may be highly variable. The way the patient resists
may provide clues to the major conflicts that haunt him.
Patient and Therapist as Collaborators
In any case, the psychodynamic interviewer wishes to go beyond a de-
scriptive diagnosis and get to know the patient as a human being. The pa-
tient must be a collaborator in a psychodynamic interview (Gabbard 2000;
Peebles-Kleiger 2002; Shevrin and Shectman 1973). To prepare the pa-
tient for psychodynamic therapy and to assess the patient’s suitability,
dynamic interviewers need to know if their patients can help them figure
out how the patients’ troubles grow out of a matrix of experience from
the past and from present circumstances. The interviewer might ask, for
example, “You said that your anxieties about death began last January.
Do you have any idea about what was going on then that might have trig-
gered these concerns?” A male patient who has recurring problems related
to the women he chooses to date may see himself as a victim of mistreat-
ment by women or as an active contributor to the problem. The inter-
viewer wants to know which it is, and might ask the patient, “Can you
see any role that you are playing in the recurrent pattern of difficulties
you have in all female relationships? Do you find that you select a partic-
ular type of woman?”
Dynamic psychotherapy does not fit well with a surgical model. The
patient is not the passive recipient of an active intervention from a doctor.
Rather, the patient and the therapist are partners in an exploratory jour-
ney. The interviewer wants to make this clear from early in the assess-
ment process to set the tone for what will follow. The increasingly sophis-
ticated application of neuroscience ideas to psychodynamic thinking has
resulted in a greater appreciation for nonverbal communications during


--- PAGE 38 ---
Assessment, Indications, and Formulation
23
the course of an evaluation. Psychodynamic interviewers must carefully
observe how the patient relates to the interviewer, knowing that the “how
to” of relatedness is laid down in procedural memory from the earliest at-
tachment relationships occurring in the patient’s childhood. One patient
may avoid eye contact, bow his head, and speak in a soft voice with a def-
erential manner. A second patient may stare at the interviewer without
blinking and clearly bask in the interviewer’s gaze as though it were a spot-
light. A third patient may break eye contact every time he mentions his
sexuality, suggesting shame at the very mention of the topic.
As long ago as 1914, Freud noted that what the patient does not re-
member and verbalize will be repeated in action in the consulting room
(Freud 1914/1958). The manifestations of the unconscious, in terms of
implicit procedural memory, are on full display throughout the interview
in the patient’s body movements, tone of voice, breathing, and manner of
speaking.
Transference and countertransference begin to take shape even before
the interview, and they become more and more evident as the actual in-
terview progresses. Each party has expectations of the other based on
comments from the referral source, phone conversations, or information
from a receptionist taking information in the clinic where the patient is
seen. Assessment of personality is always an essential feature of a psycho-
dynamic assessment of the suitability for psychotherapy. Information on
transference and countertransference that emerges in an interview tells
one a great deal about the personality makeup of the patient.
A contemporary view of personality includes four basic components
(Gabbard 2001): 1) a biologically based temperament, 2) a constellation
of internal representations of self and other that are linked to affect states
and are externalized in interpersonal relationships, 3) a characteristic set
of defense mechanisms, and 4) a related cognitive style. Psychodynamic
interviewers will find it to be of great value to think about the personality
of the patient in the following way: This patient unconsciously attempts
to actualize certain patterns of relatedness that reflect wishes that are
barely conscious or completely outside of conscious awareness. Each pa-
tient subtly tries to impose a certain way of responding and experiencing
on the interviewer. In this way, character traits play a role in actualizing
an internal object relationship in the transference-countertransference di-
mensions of the interaction with the interviewer (Gabbard 2001; Sandler
1981). Psychodynamic clinicians must immerse themselves in the here-
and-now experience of a clinical interaction as a way of getting a privileged
glimpse of the patient’s internal world and the typical patterns of relat-
edness in other relationships. Consider the following example of a male
patient and female psychiatrist:


--- PAGE 39 ---
24
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Patient: I am 33 years old, I’m single, and I have never yet met a woman
who treats me well. My first girlfriend cheated on me and dumped
me. My ex-wife used my credit cards until they were maxed out,
and then filed for divorce. Every woman I meet seems to want to
use me in some way. None of them care about me as a human be-
ing.
Psychiatrist: You must be losing your faith that any woman can be
counted on.
Patient: I think you’re on to something there. I am beginning to think I
might be better off leading a solitary existence. However, I heard
you were the best psychiatrist around, so I was hoping that I could
count on you to be different from other women who have let me
down.
Psychiatrist: My only interest here is in helping you understand yourself.
You can count on me to be trustworthy and reliable. I promise to
earn your trust.
The way the patient presents himself to his female psychiatrist is a clear
example of actualizing an internal object relationship in the here and now
of the clinical interaction. He makes it clear that he has been treated terri-
bly by women in his life, and he evokes a specific response in his evalua-
tor—she is determined to be different from all the unreliable women in
this patient’s life. He flatters and idealizes the interviewer, and she readily
takes on the role of the idealized rescuer to his role as the much-maligned
victim. The patient’s way of relating evokes a countertransference response
that represents a powerful internal figure in the patient’s world.
In this case, the interviewer accepted the role being thrust on her by the
patient. Another therapist might have defended against the role by assum-
ing an opposite stance. For example, a different female therapist might
have been nudged into a questioning attitude and challenged the pa-
tient’s victim status in such a way that the patient felt further victimized.
Yet another therapist might have unconsciously begun identifying with the
abandoning female role and defensively become overly empathic and kind
as a reaction against the pressure to get rid of the patient. Clinicians will
respond differently based on their own set of internal object relationships
and based on whether or not the patient reminds them of someone from
their own past. Any of these responses may lead to useful exploration.
The evaluator needs to be open to all responses and avoid striving for the
“correct” way to react to the patient.
Defense Mechanisms
The psychodynamic clinician is also interested in assessing the particular
constellation of defense mechanisms that characterizes each patient.


--- PAGE 40 ---
Assessment, Indications, and Formulation
25
Within the structural model, defense mechanisms are viewed as prevent-
ing awareness of unconscious sexual or aggressive wishes, but in con-
temporary psychodynamic thinking, they are less likely to be construed as
only defending against drive pressures. Today, the psychodynamic evalua-
tor would view defenses as preserving a sense of self-esteem in the face
of shame and narcissistic vulnerability, ensuring a sense of safety when
one feels dangerously threatened by abandonment or other perils, and in-
sulating oneself from external dangers (through denial, for example, or
minimization).
Defense mechanisms do not simply defend against an affect or an un-
acceptable idea; they also change the relationship between self and object
(Vaillant and Vaillant 1998). They may enable a patient to manage un-
resolved conflicts that exist either with internal objects from the past or
current significant others in external reality. Defenses are almost always
embedded in relatedness when one evaluates the personality of a patient.
Specific defenses are linked with specific personality types or, in some
cases, personality disorders. Patients with paranoid personalities, for ex-
ample, use projection as a primary defense because it allows them to dis-
avow unpleasant feelings and attribute them to others. Hence they may
assign their own self-criticism to the clinician who is interviewing them
and choose to withhold information rather than subject themselves to crit-
ical attacks.
Schizoid individuals, on the other hand, often use a retreat into fantasy
as a major defense against the anxieties inherent in interpersonal relation-
ships. Psychodynamic evaluators may find that a schizoid patient is so re-
mote as to be inaccessible, and in their countertransference responses to
such patients, therapists may feel increasingly distanced to the point that no
emotional contact seems possible. Defenses then work in concert with the
patient’s internal object relations to evoke a specific set of transference and
countertransference developments during a psychodynamic interview.
Defense mechanisms can be viewed as hierarchical, from the most
primitive to the most mature (Table 2–1).
The primitive defenses, such as splitting and projective identification,
are commonly connected with primitively organized personalities, such
as borderline personality disorder. In splitting, contradictory aspects of
self and other are compartmentalized in such a way that they remain un-
integrated and do not create conflict. Thus, someone who uses splitting
can engage in diametrically opposed behaviors without being conflicted
about them. For example, a 29-year-old female patient with borderline
personality disorder repeatedly complained that men would stare at her
body as though she were nothing but “a piece of meat” or “a sex object.”
She then sent a photograph of herself in a bikini to Playboy magazine and


--- PAGE 41 ---
26
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Table 2–1.
A hierarchy of defense mechanisms
Defense 
mechanism
Description
Primitive defenses
Splitting
Compartmentalizing experiences of self and other such that 
integration is not possible. When the individual is confronted 
with the contradictions in behavior, thought, or affect, he/
she regards the differences with bland denial or indifference. 
This defense prevents conflict stemming from the 
incompatibility of the two polarized aspects of self or other. 
Projective 
identification
Both an intrapsychic defense mechanism and an interper-
sonal communication, this phenomenon involves behav-
ing in such a way that subtle interpersonal pressure is 
placed on another person to take on characteristics of an 
aspect of the self or an internal object that is projected 
into that person. The person who is the target of the pro-
jection then begins to behave, think, and feel in keeping 
with what has been projected.
Projection
Perceiving and reacting to unacceptable inner impulses and 
their derivatives as though they were outside the self. 
Differs from projective identification in that the target of 
the projection is not changed.
Denial
Avoiding awareness of aspects of external reality that are 
difficult to face by disregarding sensory data. 
Dissociation
Disrupting one’s sense of continuity in the areas of identity, 
memory, consciousness, or perception as a way of retaining 
an illusion of psychological control in the face of helplessness 
and loss of control. Although similar to splitting, dissociation 
may in extreme cases involve alteration of memory of events 
because of the disconnection of the self from the event.
Idealization
Attributing perfect or near-perfect qualities to others as a 
way of avoiding anxiety or negative feelings, such as 
contempt, envy, or anger.
Acting out
Enacting an unconscious wish or fantasy impulsively as a 
way of avoiding painful affect.
Somatization
Converting emotional pain or other affect states into 
physical symptoms and focusing one’s attention on 
somatic (rather than intrapsychic) concerns.
Regression
Returning to an earlier phase of development or 
functioning to avoid the conflicts and tensions associated 
with one’s present level of development.
Schizoid fantasy
Retreating into one’s private internal world to avoid anxiety 
about interpersonal situations.


--- PAGE 42 ---
Assessment, Indications, and Formulation
27
Higher-level (neurotic) defenses
Introjection
Internalizing aspects of a significant person as a way of 
dealing with the loss of that person. One may also 
introject a hostile or bad object as a way of giving one 
an illusion of control over the object. Introjection 
occurs in nondefensive forms as a normal part of 
development.
Identification
Internalizing the qualities of another person by becoming 
like the person. Whereas introjection leads to an 
internalized representation experienced as an “other,” 
identification is experienced as part of the self. This, 
too, can serve nondefensive functions in normal 
development.
Displacement
Shifting feelings associated with one idea or object to 
another that resembles the original in some way. 
Intellectualization
Using excessive and abstract ideation to avoid difficult 
feelings.
Isolation of affect
Separating an idea from its associated affect state to avoid 
emotional turmoil.
Rationalization
Justification of unacceptable attitudes, beliefs, or behaviors 
to make them tolerable to oneself.
Sexualization
Endowing an object or behavior with sexual significance 
to turn a negative experience into an exciting and stimu-
lating one, or to ward off anxieties associated with the 
object.
Reaction formation Transforming an unacceptable wish or impulse into its 
opposite.
Repression
Expelling unacceptable ideas or impulses or blocking 
them from entering consciousness. This defense differs 
from denial in that the latter is associated with external 
sensory data, whereas repression is associated with inner 
states.
Undoing
Attempting to negate sexual, aggressive, or shameful 
implications from a previous comment or behavior by 
elaborating, clarifying, or doing the opposite.
Table 2–1.
A hierarchy of defense mechanisms (continued)
Defense 
mechanism
Description


--- PAGE 43 ---
28
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
asked if they would be interested in hiring her to pose for their magazine.
Her therapist pointed out that wishing to pose for Playboy seemed to be
in direct contradiction to her concern that men would view her as a sex
object. With bland indifference to the contradiction, she replied, “Oh,
no. Playboy does very tasteful photographs.”
Splitting is less common in neurotically organized patients, because they
are usually experiencing intrapsychic conflicts between opposing wishes,
self representations, and object representations. A person with obsessive-
compulsive personality characteristics, for example, would be more likely
to use defenses such as isolation of affect, reaction formation, and in-
tellectualization (Gabbard 2000). These defenses are specifically de-
signed to tone down intense feelings and emphasize cognition instead.
When a man with an obsessive-compulsive personality disorder is con-
fronted with anger, he is likely to focus on facts and data to avoid intense
Mature defenses
Humor
Finding comic and/or ironic elements in difficult situations 
to reduce unpleasant affect and personal discomfort. This 
mechanism also allows some distance and objectivity from 
events so that an individual can reflect on what is 
happening.
Suppression
Consciously deciding not to attend to a particular feeling, 
state, or impulse. This defense differs from repression and 
denial in that it is conscious rather than unconscious.
Asceticism
Attempting to eliminate pleasurable aspects of experience 
because of internal conflicts produced by that pleasure. 
This mechanism can be in the service of transcendent or 
spiritual goals, as in celibacy.
Altruism
Committing oneself to the needs of others over and above 
one’s own needs. Altruistic behavior can be used in the 
service of narcissistic problems but can also be the source 
of great achievements and constructive contributions to 
society.
Anticipation
Delaying of immediate gratification by planning and 
thinking about future achievements and 
accomplishments.
Sublimation
Transforming socially objectionable or internally 
unacceptable aims into socially acceptable ones.
Table 2–1.
A hierarchy of defense mechanisms (continued)
Defense 
mechanism
Description


--- PAGE 44 ---
Assessment, Indications, and Formulation
29
feelings (intellectualization) and be overly kind and considerate to avoid
expressing his hostility (reaction formation). These defenses would then
work in concert with a set of internal object relationships to actualize a spe-
cific wished-for interaction during the evaluation process. The patient may
wish to appear as a dutiful and responsible child who is gaining the ap-
proval of a parental figure (i.e., the clinician conducting the interview).
In this way, the wished-for interaction itself can be regarded as a defense
against a feared interaction in which the therapist becomes an embodi-
ment of the patient’s harsh and critical superego (Gabbard 2001).
Reflective Function and Mentalization
The concepts of reflective function and mentalization, which stem from
attachment theory, provide yet another dimension of a psychodynamic
assessment that helps identify the level of organization of the patient’s
character or personality. There is a strong connection between primitive
personality organization and insecure attachment (Alexander et al. 1998;
Patrick et al. 1994; Stalker and Davies 1995). Patients with primitive per-
sonality disorders, such as borderline personality disorder, are frequently
unable to resolve early trauma they have experienced, and therefore they
cannot come up with a coherent mental framework that helps them work
through the trauma.
Fonagy et al. (1996) studied these difficulties with the processing of early
neglect and trauma, and they developed the concept of reflective function,
which was defined as “the developmental acquisition that permits the
child to respond not only to other people’s behavior, but to the conception
of their beliefs, feelings, hopes, plans, and so on” (Fonagy and Target 1997,
p. 679). Reflective function is dependent on the capacity to mentalize (al-
though the terms are often used interchangeably). When attachment is
secure, mentalization takes place automatically and nonconsciously in the
same way that playing the piano or riding a bicycle is encoded in proce-
dural memory. When children are securely attached, they develop the abil-
ity to understand people in terms of their feelings, desires, beliefs, and
expectations. Thus, mentalization is a capacity that allows the child to per-
ceive an internal world that motivates oneself and others to behave in cer-
tain ways. It also allows the child to recognize the difference between a
perception of others associated with a representation of those figures and
the way the persons actually are.
If we view mentalization from a developmental perspective, a child
who is younger than age 3 tends to function in a psychic equivalence
mode, in which no distinction is made between how things actually are and
how they are perceived. But between ages 3 and 6, a child gradually in-


--- PAGE 45 ---
30
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
tegrates a pretend mode with the psychic equivalence mode, provided
that there is a secure attachment to a parent or caregiver. Then the dis-
tinction between representation and reality begins to solidify. If a 4-year-
old boy, for example, asks his 8-year-old sister to play “baby and mommy”
with him, he will know that the sister is not really his mother and that he
is not really a baby. He recognizes that he and his sister are simply playing
because they have the capacity to mentalize. In dynamic psychotherapy,
this capacity to “play” is crucial because it allows a patient to recognize the
difference between a transference perception of the therapist and the
way the therapist really is. Even in a diagnostic evaluation, one might ex-
plore the patient’s capacity to differentiate perception or belief from fact.
One might ask, for example, “Do you think your boss really hates you?
Or do you think you might just be perceiving him that way?”
Level of Personality Organization
The psychodynamic clinician uses a combination of defense mechanisms,
internal object relations, ego strengths or weaknesses, and an assessment
of reflective function to determine the patient’s level of personality orga-
nization (Table 2–2). This assessment differs from one based on DSM-
IV-TR categories (American Psychiatric Association 2000). It involves
diagnostic understanding of the person, rather than a diagnostic label. Its
value is primarily in the way it informs the psychotherapy.
Patients who are neurotically organized see themselves and others as
people with both good and bad qualities and do not have to compart-
mentalize people into “all good” and “all bad.” They also have a fairly
stable identity over time, as opposed to people who are organized at a
borderline level who have identity diffusion and look quite different from
day to day to others (Kernberg 1976). Neurotic individuals also have a
superego that functions fairly smoothly but is also harsh and critical, so
the person might be rather self-denigrating and guilty much of the time.
They may also worry a great deal about seemingly trivial matters. The su-
perego does not function so smoothly with persons organized at a border-
line level. They may be capable of doing harm to others without guilt at
one moment, and at another moment feel extraordinarily guilty and sui-
cidal over what they have done. Whereas borderline organization is asso-
ciated with primitive defenses (such as splitting, projective identification,
idealization, and devaluation), neurotically organized people are much
more likely to have the neurotic range of defenses (such as reaction for-
mation, intellectualization, displacement, and repression).
People who are neurotically organized experience a great deal of intra-
psychic conflict, and they have intact reflective function so they can rec-


--- PAGE 46 ---
Assessment, Indications, and Formulation
31
ognize that their representation of a person or event is not necessarily the
same as the actual reality of the person or event. They also can under-
stand that their behaviors are motivated by internal beliefs or feeling states.
By contrast, people with a borderline level of organization often have
substantial deficits in the self-structure alongside their conflicts and have
poorly developed reflective function. They often experience things as
just happening to them, rather than being motivated by internal states.
Finally, ego strengths—including impulse control, judgment, capacity for
sustained work, and reality testing—are typical of people who are neu-
rotically organized. Borderline organization is associated with various ego
weaknesses, such as impulsivity, impaired judgment, difficulty persevering
in sustained work, and occasional lapses in reality testing. These lapses gen-
erally involve transient paranoid thinking under stress or a mild loosening
of associations in unstructured situations.
The assessment of the patient’s level of organization is extremely use-
ful in determining suitability for psychodynamic psychotherapy. Dynamic
therapists tailor their approach to the patient on a continuum from being
highly exploratory or expressive to being supportive or suppressive. A
neurotic level of organization augurs well for a highly exploratory approach
Table 2–2.
Level of organization
Neurotic level
Borderline level
Superego well integrated 
but punitive
Superego integration minimal; capacity 
for concern and guilt fluctuating 
considerably
High-level defenses, including 
repression, reaction formation, 
intellectualization, doing and 
undoing, and displacement
Primitive defenses, including splitting, 
projective identification, idealization, 
and devaluation
Identity reasonably stable, and 
internal object relations 
characterized by ambivalently 
regarded whole objects and 
triangular conflict
Identity diffusion and object relations 
of a “partial” rather than “whole” 
nature—split into “all good” and “all 
bad” aspects
Notable ego strengths, including 
good impulse control, intact 
judgment, consistent reality testing, 
and capacity for sustained work
Nonspecific ego weaknesses, including 
impulsivity, impaired judgment, brief 
compromises in reality testing, and 
difficulty sustaining work
Conflict-based pathology
Significant deficits existing alongside 
conflicts
Intact reflective function
Impaired reflective function


--- PAGE 47 ---
32
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
to dynamic therapy, whereas a borderline organization generally requires
that the therapist also offer support and psychoeducational interventions
to improve reflective function, support deficient areas in the patient’s
ego, and help the patient integrate disparate views of the self and others. In
determining a patient’s suitability for highly exploratory or expressive psy-
chotherapy, several additional characteristics are predictive of a good ca-
pacity to use exploratory therapy: 1) strong motivation to understand
oneself, 2) significant suffering, 3) good frustration tolerance, 4) psycho-
logical mindedness (making insight possible), and 5) capacity to think in
terms of analogy and metaphor.
When one is evaluating a patient, it is also useful to offer some insight
as a trial interpretation to see if the patient is psychologically minded
enough to use that approach. For example, a 41-year-old male patient
complained to the psychiatrist evaluating him that he felt he did not mea-
sure up to other men his age in the work setting. He was stuck in middle
management, while others were progressing to becoming CEOs or execu-
tive vice presidents. He seemed to have difficulty expressing himself, and
at one point he said to the evaluating psychiatrist: “It’s kind of humiliat-
ing to talk about this stuff with you.” The psychiatrist responded, “Maybe
you’re also comparing yourself to me in this situation and feeling that you
don’t measure up in my eyes, either.” The patient reflected for a moment,
and responded as follows: “Well, you seem to be a successful academic
psychiatrist, and I’ve done nothing in comparison to you. I’m a nobody.”
With this trial interpretation, the psychiatrist tried to bring to the pa-
tient’s awareness the possibility that his experience of comparing himself
with other men in the workplace was also taking place in the doctor-
patient relationship during the evaluation. The patient used the insight well
to further understand what was happening in the evaluation. This re-
sponse suggested good suitability for exploratory psychotherapy.
By contrast, a number of features in addition to the borderline level of
personality organization suggest that some supportive work will be neces-
sary in the dynamic psychotherapy (Gabbard 2000). These factors include
1) the patient being in the midst of a severe life crisis; 2) poor frustration or
anxiety tolerance; 3) excessive concreteness, leading to a lack of psycholog-
ical mindedness; 4) low intelligence; 5) little capacity for self-observation;
and 6) difficulty in forming a trusting relationship with the evaluator.
Other Aspects of the Evaluation
Although the emphasis in this chapter is on assessment for long-term dy-
namic therapy, a good evaluation does much more than that. A clinician
evaluating a patient for psychotherapy must also attend to an accurate


--- PAGE 48 ---
Assessment, Indications, and Formulation
33
descriptive diagnosis. After the patient is allowed to tell his or her story,
the interviewer must focus the patient on symptoms, course, family his-
tory, and medication response to gain a full clinical picture. In a true bio-
psychosocial model of diagnosis and treatment, a descriptive diagnosis
and somatic treatments tailored to the diagnosis (where indicated) must
be part of the overall treatment plan.
A thorough physical examination conducted by a primary care practi-
tioner should be scheduled to rule out the presence of physical illness.
Laboratory and imaging studies may be necessary in some cases. Also,
psychological testing is extremely useful in challenging diagnostic cases.
Although some patients insist on complete privacy, others have no objec-
tion if the evaluator supplements the historical information by interview-
ing family members or significant others. These collateral sources of data
may be extremely valuable because loved ones may bring in information
based on first-hand observations that the patient has left out. An inter-
view with a family member or partner may also provide an opportunity
to provide education about psychotherapy and to clarify that it will be
confidential. Finally, meetings with the family will often shed light on
cultural and social factors relevant to the patient’s clinical picture.
Indications
As noted in the preceding section, a psychodynamic assessment involves
evaluating the personality structure of the patient to determine whether
psychodynamic therapy would be suitable as well as determining whether
the patient’s disorder or clinical symptoms are likely to respond to dynamic
therapy. Indications for extended psychodynamic therapy are not rigor-
ously developed because of the lack of systematic controlled data on what
conditions respond to this particular modality. If a brief course of psycho-
therapy or a particular medication will successfully treat the patient’s
problem, and if the patient is not interested in in-depth understanding,
extended dynamic therapy may not be appropriate. However, when brief
therapeutic approaches and pharmacotherapy both fail to address the pa-
tient’s suffering, an extended dynamic therapeutic approach may be in-
dicated. Patients with personality disorders—such as obsessive-compulsive,
avoidant, dependent, self-defeating, and hysterical (higher-level histrionic)
personality disorders—who have neurotic character organization may
benefit from extended psychodynamic psychotherapy or psychoanalysis
(Gunderson and Gabbard 1999). Certain patients with generalized anxi-
ety disorder may also use extended psychodynamic psychotherapy to
gain a greater grasp of the reasons for their anxiety and to tolerate it so
that it doesn’t interfere with their lives. Other anxiety disorders—such as


--- PAGE 49 ---
34
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
panic disorder, social phobia, and posttraumatic stress disorder—may not
respond to brief treatments. In these cases, long-term dynamic therapy
may be needed to explore the patient’s resistances to change and to un-
derstand the dynamic origins of the symptoms. Patients with certain eat-
ing disorders, including those with anorexia nervosa, may also need ex-
tended psychodynamic psychotherapy (Dare 2001).
Three of the Cluster B personality disorders—narcissistic, borderline,
and histrionic—are also indications for the use of extended psychodynamic
psychotherapy because they rarely respond to brief therapy (Gunderson
and Gabbard 1999). However, some supportive interventions usually need
to be added to deal with deficits of the self-structure and impaired re-
flective function. Depending on the patient, ego weaknesses may also be
present that require a supportive approach in conjunction with insight
to be most effective. Certain patients with major depressive disorder, dys-
thymic disorder, or depressive personality characteristics may require long-
term dynamic therapy, often in conjunction with antidepressant medica-
tion, to reach maximum benefit (Blatt 2004; Gabbard 2000).
Contraindications for extended psychodynamic therapy include direct
treatment of symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder. No matter how
fascinating the meaning of obsessive-compulsive symptoms may be in pa-
tients with obsessive-compulsive disorder, there are no reported cases
in which the symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder disappear with
psychodynamic psychotherapy alone. The combination of behavior ther-
apy and a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor is generally the treatment
of choice. Nevertheless, dynamic therapy may be useful as an adjunctive
treatment to address relationship problems or problems of compliance
with medication regimens. A patient who is actively abusing alcohol or
drugs is also not likely to benefit from extended psychodynamic psycho-
therapy until the substance abuse is under control. Persons with anti-
social personality disorder are generally unresponsive to any form of ther-
apy unless they have an Axis I diagnosis of major depressive disorder or
have some capacity for remorse or guilt (Woody et al. 1985).
We have not yet discussed patients who are organized at a psychotic
level. Generally, patients with schizophrenia will require a good deal of
pharmacotherapy, hospital treatment, cognitive-behavioral techniques, and
supportive therapy as part of an overall treatment plan. They may also re-
quire cognitive remediation and vocational assistance. Nevertheless, prin-
ciples of psychodynamic psychotherapy may frequently be of great as-
sistance in the overall treatment plan (Lucas 2003). Even when other
treatments are primary, psychodynamic understanding of the psychotic
patient can be helpful in evaluating the patient’s resistances to getting bet-
ter or the treater’s countertransference difficulties. Some bipolar patients


--- PAGE 50 ---
Assessment, Indications, and Formulation
35
may also be treatable with psychodynamic therapy when they are euthy-
mic, but always in conjunction with medication (Gabbard 2000).
Psychodynamic Formulation
After the patient has been thoroughly evaluated and the level of object
relations, ego strengths and weaknesses, self-cohesion, reflective function-
ing, and deficits versus conflicts have all been assessed, a psychodynamic
formulation is helpful in planning the treatment. Psychiatric residents
and other trainees often have a great deal of difficulty with the formula-
tion because they try to do too much. A good psychodynamic formula-
tion is biopsychosocial in nature, and it consists of a succinct statement
of understanding the patient that explains the clinical picture and informs
the treatment.
Three components of a psychodynamic formulation are essential (Sperry
et al. 1992). First, in a sentence or two, there should be a brief description
of the nature of the clinical picture and the associated stressor or stres-
sors. Second, and perhaps most difficult for beginners, is a set of explan-
atory hypotheses. How do biological, intrapsychic, and sociocultural factors
contribute to the clinical picture? Also, how do these three sets of factors
interact with one another? The third component of the psychodynamic
formulation is a succinct statement about how the first two components
will inform the treatment and the prognosis.
Identifying and articulating these three components can seem formi-
dable to trainees learning psychotherapy. However, the task can become
less daunting if several key principles are kept in mind (Kassaw and Gab-
bard 2002):
1. Do not try to be all-inclusive. It is impossible for anyone to explain all
of the patient’s difficulties. Focus on one or two crucial themes that
appear to be at the core of the patient’s problems.
2. Keep in mind that the patient’s historical narrative is a construction
that conveys a good deal about the patient’s theory of pathogenesis.
The way patients conceptualize their life histories and problems will
tell you a great deal about who they are.
3. Always look for stressors that may trigger symptoms or unpleasant
emotional states that have led the patient to seek help.
4. Pay attention to nonverbal information and how the patient talks to
you—not just what the patient says.
5. Draw on the here-and-now transference and countertransference data
derived from your interaction with the patient to understand the pa-
tient’s characteristic difficulties in both past and present relationships.
