

--- PAGE 51 ---
36
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
6. The best way to observe the patient’s defense mechanisms is by not-
ing how they serve as resistances in the assessment interviews.
7. Predict how the patient’s relationship patterns may emerge in the
psychotherapy and influence its course.
8. Always keep in mind that a psychodynamic formulation is only a hy-
pothesis or a set of hypotheses. The formulation must be revised con-
tinually as new data appear and the therapist gains greater understand-
ing of the patient.
A clinical example will illustrate these principles:
Ms. A, a 38-year-old divorced woman, came to a trainee clinic because
she was beginning a new relationship with someone who was “trouble,”
and because she was experiencing depressive symptoms. She said that she
had never been able to overcome her depressive thoughts and feelings
since she was a late teenager. She described feeling “down,” having no in-
terest in anything, lacking motivation, experiencing hypersomnolence,
and having reduced concentration. She also described feeling hopeless
and worthless.
Her parents divorced when she was 12, but she said she could see it
coming from the time she was 8 years old. She married at age 19 and had
a child 5 years later. The demands of a child were overwhelming for her,
and she was quite depressed for the first 7 years of her son’s life. She said
she did not have a good role model at home, so being a mother was ex-
traordinarily challenging for her. Her husband wanted her to work, and
she could not meet his expectations either.
She had divorced 4 years before coming to the clinic and was currently
living on her own. She spends most of her free time with her son, who
lives with her ex-husband. She dates two recent boyfriends and works as
a clerk in a store. She also tries to go to college on the side to get a bach-
elor’s degree.
She told Dr. B, the male resident evaluating her, that she was addicted
to alcohol and sex. She said she had been drinking since age 13, when
older men in her apartment complex would buy alcohol for her. Even as
a young teenager, she was sexually attracted to these older men and would
flirt with them. One of them who bought her alcohol was particularly ap-
pealing to her, and she had intercourse with him when she was only 13.
Eventually she began to use cocaine, amphetamines, and other illegal drugs,
and she described herself as highly “promiscuous” with many sexual part-
ners. She said that her mother had never really been able to take care of
her because her mother was emotionally unstable and upset all the time.
She remembers her mother shouting at her father frequently, and she of-
ten thought that her mother might be psychotic.
The patient expressed significant contempt toward her alcoholic fa-
ther, who was an open “womanizer” throughout the marriage. He paid
very little attention to Ms. A, and his only positive comments and inter-
actions revolved around her physical appearance. She said that her father
and most of her family would usually treat her like a doll, and her main


--- PAGE 52 ---
Assessment, Indications, and Formulation
37
means of getting attention was to “look cute.” She recalled an instance in
college when her father visited her and told her that she was dressed in a
manner that was too slovenly.
Ms. A attends Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings, and her sponsor
instructed her to seek female-only groups, because she felt that a part of
her desire to attend AA meetings was to meet men. She expressed great
frustration about being at a gay male group where she felt “invisible,” as
she was unable to attract the men in the group. The patient denied having
any close female friends and had difficulty recalling any significant female
relationships before age 12.
Dr. B found himself with unusually positive feelings toward Ms. A. He
was more than eager to shift his schedule to accommodate appointment
times with her. He also noted that he found himself trying to please her,
at times avoiding topics that might be upsetting for her. He noted that he
was inordinately empathic. For example, he worked diligently to reduce
her sense of responsibility about choosing men whom she felt were not
good for her. He assured her that the men were just as responsible as she
was. Dr. B noted that he was careful to dress well on the days he saw Ms. A
and that he always noticed her clothing. He felt that she called attention
to her body in a way that managed to make him feel embarrassed about
noticing her physical characteristics. He had trouble ending the hours
with her, and even offered her extra sessions if she needed them. In addi-
tion to the sexual attraction he felt, Dr. B also sensed himself wanting to
be paternal toward her.
The first component of the formulation is a simple statement of the
clinical picture and the nature of the stressor. Ms. A is a 38-year-old, di-
vorced white female who presents with a history of depression and sub-
stance abuse in the context of lifelong relationship problems with both
men and women. The most recent stressor was starting a new relation-
ship with a man she regarded as “trouble.”
The second component involves a biopsychosocial effort to explain
the patient’s clinical picture. A psychodynamic formulation must be em-
bedded in an understanding of the patient’s genetic and biological diathe-
ses and the patient’s sociocultural milieu. Biological factors contributing
to the picture include a family history of possible psychosis and a genetic
predisposition to alcohol abuse based on her father’s alcoholism. A psy-
chological hypothesis might be stated as follows: Ms. A grew up in a tu-
multuous childhood situation where she felt neglected by her mother, so
she attempted to get love and admiration from her father by attending to
her appearance and sexualizing their relationship. This past pattern of
relatedness is carried into the present with men she meets in AA and with
Dr. B. Through projective identification, she transforms Dr. B into a res-
cuing paternal figure who is sexually attracted to her and wants to accom-
modate her in any way he can. She dresses in a way that appeals to him
and relates to him in such a way that the interpersonal pressure creates an


--- PAGE 53 ---
38
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
identification in Dr. B with the projected object representation, that is,
an all-good father who wishes to rescue her and save her from “bad men.”
Splitting may also be manifested by viewing other men and her mother
as “all bad.”
Two relevant sociocultural factors are her severe financial constraints,
which have led her to need support from men all her life, and her reaction
to a society that overvalues youth and beauty as she approaches middle
age.
The final component is a prediction about the course of the therapy
based on the other two components of the formulation: Ms. A will need
to continue her 12-step program, because her psychotherapy would be
compromised by ongoing substance abuse. We can anticipate that she will
approach the psychotherapy by trying to charm Dr. B into a paternal but
sexualized role. When Dr. B attempts to help her reflect more on herself
and work on exploring her inner world, she may feel rebuffed and make
him into a “bad object.” She may then become enraged at Dr. B and seek
another man to meet her needs elsewhere.
This formulation takes into account biopsychosocial aspects of the clin-
ical picture and, in a modest way, tries to hypothesize the major themes
that will affect the psychotherapy. Antidepressants will also be part of the
treatment plan, along with the 12-step program, because the patient ap-
pears to have dysthymia in addition to the substance abuse on Axis I. On
Axis II, Ms. A appears to have histrionic and borderline features that will
require further clarification as the therapy progresses. Her primitive de-
fenses and split object relations suggest a borderline level of organization.
Her reflective function is limited at this point, and the psychotherapy
will need to attempt to enhance her capacity to look within.
Summary
Assessment of patients for psychodynamic psychotherapy should include
an evaluation of the patient’s psychological characteristics in terms of the
patient’s capacity to use a psychodynamic approach. In addition, the clin-
ical symptomatology must be assessed in terms of whether or not it is
likely to respond to long-term dynamic therapy. Hence, psychodynamic
interviewing must be geared to the patient’s personality as well as to that
patient’s capacity to collaborate in a search for understanding. In reaching
a conclusion about the suitability of the patient for dynamic psychother-
apy, it is essential to evaluate several key characteristics: 1) the nature of
superego functioning, 2) the level of defense mechanisms typically used by
the patient, 3) the characteristic pattern of object relationships reflecting
the patient’s internal world, 4) ego strengths and ego weaknesses, 5) the


--- PAGE 54 ---
Assessment, Indications, and Formulation
39
presence of conflict-based pathology versus significant deficits, and 6)
the patient’s capacity for reflective function. These characteristics will
help the evaluator determine whether the patient has a neurotic or a bor-
derline level of character organization. Neurotically organized patients
are ideally suited for long-term psychodynamic therapy, whereas those or-
ganized at a borderline level usually require some supportive strategies to
make dynamic therapy possible.
After a careful assessment of the patient, an initial psychodynamic for-
mulation can be developed to guide the therapy. The key components are
a brief description of the nature of the clinical picture and the stressors that
may have brought the patient to treatment; a set of explanatory hypothe-
ses that touch on biological, psychological, and sociocultural factors; and a
prediction about how the treatment and the prognosis will be informed by
the factors that contribute to the patient’s clinical picture. Psychodynamic
formulations should always be biopsychosocial and should be considered
to be a set of hypotheses that require constant revision as more information
is learned about the patient in the course of the psychotherapy.
References
Alexander PC, Anderson CL, Brand B, et al: Adult attachment and long-term ef-
fects in survivors of incest. Child Abuse Negl 22:45–61, 1998
American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, 4th Edition, Text Revision. Washington, DC, American Psychiat-
ric Association, 2000
Blatt S: Experiences of Depression. Washington, DC, American Psychological
Association, 2004
Dare C: Psychodynamic psychotherapy for eating disorders, in Treatments of Psy-
chiatric Disorders, 3rd Edition. Edited by Gabbard GO. Washington, DC,
American Psychiatric Press, 2001, pp 2169–2192
Fonagy P, Target M: Attachment and reflective function: their role in self-organi-
zation. Dev Psychopathol 9:679–700, 1997
Fonagy P, Leigh T, Steele M, et al: The relation of attachment status, psychiatric
classification, and response to psychotherapy. J Consult Clin Psychol 64:22–
31, 1996
Freud S: Remembering, repeating and working-through (further recommenda-
tions on the technique of psycho-analysis II) (1914), in The Standard Edition
of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol 12. Translated
and edited by Strachey J. London, Hogarth Press, 1958, pp 145–156
Gabbard GO: Psychodynamic Psychotherapy in Clinical Practice, 3rd Edition.
Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 2000
Gabbard GO: Psychoanalysis and psychoanalytic psychotherapy, in Handbook of
Personality Disorders: Theory, Research, and Treatment. Edited by Livesley
WJ. New York, Guilford, 2001, pp 359–376


--- PAGE 55 ---
40
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Gunderson JG, Gabbard GO: Making the case for psychoanalytic therapies in the
current psychiatric environment. J Am Psychoanal Assoc 47:679–704, 1999
Kassaw K, Gabbard GO: Creating a psychodynamic formulation from the clinical
evaluation. Am J Psychiatry 159:721–726, 2002
Kernberg OF: Technical considerations in the treatment of borderline personality
organization. J Am Psychoanal Assoc 24:795–829, 1976
Lucas R: The relationship between psychoanalysis and schizophrenia. Int J Psy-
choanal 84:3–8, 2003
Patrick M, Hobson RP, Castle D, et al: Personality disorder and the mental repre-
sentation of early experience. Dev Psychopathol 6:375–388, 1994
Peebles-Kleiger MJ: Beginnings: The Art and Science of Planning Psychotherapy.
Hillsdale, NJ, Analytic Press, 2002
Sandler J: Character traits and object relationships. Psychoanal Q 50:694–708,
1981
Shevrin H, Shectman F: The diagnostic process in psychiatric evaluations. Bull
Menninger Clin 37:451–494, 1973
Sperry L, Gudeman JE, Blackwell B, et al: Psychiatric Case Formulations. Wash-
ington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 1992
Stalker CA, Davies F: Attachment organization and adaptation in sexually abused
women. Can J Psychiatry 40:234–240, 1995
Vaillant GE, Vaillant LM: The role of ego mechanisms of defense in the diagnosis
of personality disorders, in Making Diagnosis Meaningful: Enhancing Evalu-
ation and Treatment of Psychological Disorders. Edited by Barron JW. Wash-
ington, DC, American Psychological Association, 1998, pp 139–158
Woody GE, McLellan T, Luborsky L, et al: Sociopathy and psychotherapy out-
come. Arch Gen Psychiatry 42:1081–1086, 1985


--- PAGE 56 ---
41
3
The Nuts and Bolts of 
Psychotherapy
Getting Started
Some patients start psychotherapy with the same clinician who con-
ducts their initial intake evaluation or consultation. Others are referred
by the consultant to someone else for psychotherapy. If the patient is re-
ferred by a colleague, the manner in which the referral is made reveals
important information about the patient. One can discern a good deal of
useful data about potential transference-countertransference dynamics
from what the referring clinician says.
One patient was referred with the following note: “This patient doesn’t
have any particular psychiatric diagnosis or even emotional difficulties but
would like to explore himself a bit in a psychotherapy process.” The psycho-
therapist’s private response was “Oh, really? What is the patient doing in
therapy then? Does this reflect a collusion between the patient and the
evaluating clinician to deny and disavow psychological conflict or emo-
tional suffering? Is the patient too ashamed to admit problems?” The
therapist took this up with the patient in the first session. She asked the
patient how he viewed his goals for the therapy. He responded that he
wanted to become “even more perfect.” It soon became apparent that the
patient had a narcissistic personality disorder and wanted confirmation of
his exceptional mental health rather than an understanding of his need to
present himself as having transcended emotional problems.


--- PAGE 57 ---
42
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
In another case, the referring doctor told a psychiatric resident who
was going to be the therapist of a patient he had evaluated, “This patient
is probably the best candidate for psychotherapy and the most motivated
patient I have ever seen. The only reason I’m not taking her into treat-
ment myself is that she can’t afford my fee. It’s very important that you
handle her with great care. Don’t try to confront her or say anything that
would be viewed as hurtful because she has had a terribly difficult life.”
Anytime a referral source says that the patient is the “most” or the “best”
of anything, the therapist must be wary. This packaging of the patient as
“special” often reflects a countertransference idealization of the patient
that suggests an identification with an all-loving or all-protective parent
that the patient has projected into the therapist. Part of this transference-
countertransference constellation is the unconscious agreement to keep
all aggressive and negative feelings out of the dyad. This arrangement is also
a setup for splitting between the referring doctor and the new therapist,
who is unlikely to live up to the expectations of the referring clinician and
is likely to “fail” the patient because of it.
One agenda for the initial meetings with the new therapist should be
to explore any feelings the patient has about the evaluation and the referral
process. Did the patient feel “dumped”? Was there any curiosity about why
the intake doctor did not agree to treat the patient? How does the patient
feel about the new therapist? One may also inquire about whether the
patient withheld specific problems or historical data from the evaluating
clinician because the material was so shameful that it could only be shared
with the treating therapist.
In any case, whether the patient is referred by another clinician or is
evaluated by the psychotherapist, the patient and the therapist undergo
a process of getting acquainted with one another that determines whether
or not they will ultimately work together. If the therapy “takes,” it is often
because of a certain chemistry between the two parties, that elusive con-
struct known as therapist-patient match.
More than good fortune is at work, though, when the therapist and pa-
tient decide to embark on the therapeutic journey together. Establishing
rapport with a patient is an art that can be learned. A therapist who is
truly present with the patient and who listens in an accepting way to the
patient’s story validates that the patient’s life has meaning and value. The
patient may feel heard and understood for the first time. One of the rea-
sons that people continue to seek out long-term dynamic psychotherapy
and psychoanalysis is that they are haunted by the prospect of an unob-
served life. They long for a witness who can recognize what they’ve been
through and who will listen to their story. Poland (2000) describes the role
of witness as “one who recognizes and grasps the emotional impact of the


--- PAGE 58 ---
The Nuts and Bolts of Psychotherapy
43
patient’s self-exploration in the immediacy of the moment, yet who stays
in attendance without intruding supposed wisdom” (p. 18). Among the
rarely discussed functions of the psychotherapist are to observe the pa-
tient’s life and to appreciate its specific meanings to the patient.
Empathic and concerned listening also promotes a therapeutic alliance
between patient and therapist. The therapeutic alliance is a fundamental
concept that is applicable to all forms of psychotherapy, even to pharma-
cotherapy. Although it is variously defined, research consistently shows
that the alliance is a critical ingredient in the outcome of psychotherapy
(Horvath and Symonds 1991; Martin et al. 2000). In an analysis of the
role played by the therapeutic alliance in the National Institute of Mental
Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program, Krup-
nick et al. (1996) examined outcomes of the four different arms of the
study: brief interpersonal therapy, brief cognitive-behavioral therapy, med-
ication plus clinical management, and placebo plus clinical management.
They found that the therapeutic alliance was the most crucial factor in
determining outcome. In fact, it accounted for more variance in treatment
outcome (21%) than any of the treatment interventions themselves!
A positive therapeutic alliance is an important mediator of symptom
change and a necessary condition for effective interpretation of uncon-
scious conflict (Luborsky 1984). Good interpersonal relations and positive
pretreatment expectations tend to predict a good therapeutic alliance
(Gibbons et al. 2003).
How the patient reacts to the therapist is a good indication of whether
a therapeutic alliance has been established. The alliance is present when
the patient feels helped by the therapist, and specifically when the pa-
tient feels that the therapist is collaborating in pursuit of common thera-
peutic goals (Frieswyck et al. 1986; Horwitz et al. 1996). To foster an al-
liance, the therapist enlists the patient’s help in figuring things out from
early in the first consultation.
Throughout the process of therapy, the patient is asked to identify
with the therapist’s interest in understanding and reflection. Therapists
must seek to inculcate a sense of curiosity in the patient. A major part of
the first session or two is a collaborative effort to identify reasonable goals
for the treatment that both patient and therapist can endorse. The sys-
tematic discussion of these goals often solidifies a beginning therapeutic
alliance.
Some patients are reluctant to enter therapy. They may be chagrined
to learn that there is no magic pill that can cure what ails them. They may
lack basic trust in the therapist’s intentions. They may have read in Time
magazine that Freud is dead (he is ritually killed off by the media every
couple of years, only to be resurrected). They may have heard that the


--- PAGE 59 ---
44
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
benefits of psychodynamic therapy are “unproven.” They may have read
sensational accounts in the newspapers about therapists who sleep with
their patients or otherwise exploit them. Converting an intake evaluation
or a consultation into a psychotherapeutic process is thus a major chal-
lenge in many instances.
Psychotherapists should be prepared to discuss with their patients what
psychotherapy is and what it is not. They may need to explain that much
of mental life is unconscious and that problematic patterns in the pa-
tient’s life are likely caused by factors that are not completely within the
conscious awareness of the patient. A psychotherapist has knowledge of
how the mind works that may help the patient understand these unseen
factors. Moreover, a basic axiom of human nature is that others can see
things about you that you cannot see yourself. One role that a therapist
plays is making observations about the patient that others probably won’t
bring up. The patient should be told that the therapist’s primary task is
to help the patient gain understanding. Some patients may benefit from
explanations about how the therapist’s role differs from that of a parent,
friend, or lover. Other patients will ask why it takes so long. Human be-
ings are complex. The process takes time because the defenses of a life-
time don’t easily lend themselves to dismantling and exploration. The pa-
tient will resist the process and will tenaciously hold on to the familiar
ways of doing things for quite some time before change seems possible.
For some patients who are skeptical, it may be useful to offer a trial of
treatment for 3 months or so to see if the process is worthwhile. A reas-
sessment can be made at the end of that time. During this trial phase, the
patient may note that the familiar patterns of conflict creating distress are
also present in the relationship with the therapist, and that the therapeu-
tic relationship itself may be the subject of scrutiny as things progress.
Myths may need to be dispelled as well. The therapist is not totally si-
lent. The therapist cannot read minds. The therapy does not last forever.
The therapist is not interested in changing your sexual orientation. The
patient does not have to lie on a couch and free associate. The process is
not an archaeological dig for buried remnants of the past that must be re-
covered through hypnosis in a dramatic emotional catharsis or abreaction.
In the course of this discussion, the collaborative nature of psychother-
apy should be clearly spelled out. The patient will need to set goals, bring
relevant material to work toward those goals, and assist the therapist in
figuring out how current patterns of behavior fit with the patient’s past.
The therapist can meet the patient halfway, but not much further. When
confronted with a question from a passive patient—such as “You’re the ex-
pert. Aren’t you supposed to tell me what causes this?”—the beginning
therapist must be nondefensive and open. A possible response might be


--- PAGE 60 ---
The Nuts and Bolts of Psychotherapy
45
the following: “I can’t figure out everything by myself. You and I have to
seek the causes together. I can’t do it on my own.”
For a patient who is highly ambivalent about starting psychotherapy,
it is rarely useful to take a “hard sell” approach in which one tries to per-
suade the patient that therapy is a necessity. This zeal is likely to make a
skeptical patient even more hesitant because the therapist seems too in-
vested in “arm-twisting.” In many cases when the therapist is a trainee,
the patient may start to feel like the investment in the therapy is more
related to the trainee’s need for a case rather than the patient’s need for
treatment.
For such patients, the “Tiffany’s approach” may be more productive.
For years the famed jewelry store in New York (now found all over the
country) had the reputation of being reluctant to sell jewelry. If a cus-
tomer asked about a particular necklace, for example, the salesperson
might look reluctant and ask, “What do you have to wear with it?” The
surprised customer would then be in a position of trying to convince the
salesperson that she should sell the necklace to her.
The analogy to “selling” someone on psychotherapy should be clear. The
patient may actually respond better when a therapist is not too eager to
start the process in light of the patient’s ambivalence. It may be much
more helpful to say, “I can tell you have real reservations about starting
therapy at this point. The success of therapy depends on the patient’s
motivation. So I’m not sure this is the best time to start. You may want
to think about it awhile. It’s a long and at times difficult process, and you
shouldn’t rush into it unless you’re ready.” This approach is authentic be-
cause it recognizes how the patient actually feels, and some patients will
appreciate the therapist’s sensitivity to their deep reservations.
If the patient then insists on starting, as is often the case, the therapist
should still be cautious and spend a good deal of time with the patient
discussing realistic goals for the therapy. As noted above, it may also be
helpful to agree on a trial of treatment with an agreement to reassess how
things are going in 6–8 weeks.
Practical Considerations
Many beginning therapists have practical questions that don’t often ap-
pear in textbooks. For example, what do you say to the patient in the
waiting room? Many patients are terribly ashamed about the need to see
a psychotherapist and may not wish to have their name spoken aloud
when the therapist comes up to them in the waiting room to make intro-
ductions. Instead of saying “Are you Mr. Wilson?,” therapists may dis-


--- PAGE 61 ---
46
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
creetly ask the receptionist in the waiting area to point out the new ar-
rival. Then they can simply greet the patient by saying, “Hello, I’m Dr.
Smith.” This approach leaves patients free to determine whether they
wish to speak their name aloud in a semipublic waiting area.
Most dynamic therapists allow their patients to begin the session with
whatever is on their mind. But what if the patient actually “begins” the
session before it starts? As patient and therapist walk together to the of-
fice, some patients may prefer to be silent, which the therapist can cer-
tainly respect. Others may engage in chit-chat about the weather, current
events, or other matters. Some curious patients may even ask the thera-
pist personal questions or make observations about the therapist: “How
long have you been working here?” “Are you in training here?” “Your ac-
cent sounds like you might be from Europe. Which country?” “You look
awfully young to be a psychiatrist.” “You look more like a model than a
therapist.” These questions are a bit disarming for a new therapist, and there
is no “cookbook” approach to managing them.
“When in doubt, be human” is a useful rule of thumb. A beginning
therapist can very easily err on the side of being nonresponsive and seem-
ingly inhuman if one is completely silent in response to the patient’s com-
ments or questions. Some degree of chit-chat on the way to the office may
make patients more comfortable so they feel they can open up to the ther-
apist when the session begins. If patients start the session by bringing up
their personal problems in the hallway, one may wish to say, “Let’s talk
about that when we get into the office,” as a way of signaling that things
aren’t confidential in the corridor.
Regarding personal questions, different therapists have different atti-
tudes about self-revelation. Some who are more private by nature may
prefer to say next to nothing about themselves. Others may share certain
aspects of their lives in a way that does not burden the patient. Another
consideration to keep in mind is that there are some questions a patient
has the right to know when starting a new therapy process. Among the
items in that category would be whether or not the therapist is in training
or under supervision, what the fee will be, if the therapist is planning to
leave in the next few months as a product of change in clinical assignment
or graduation from a training program, how long the sessions are, and
how missed sessions are managed.
There are a number of other questions that fall into a gray area where
no simple rule is possible. These include the therapist’s marital status, re-
ligion, age, and sexual orientation. With gay patients, some therapists
might choose to reveal that they are gay if they think it would facilitate
the process by helping a particular patient overcome a sense of shame or
embarrassment. Other therapists might prefer to keep their private lives


--- PAGE 62 ---
The Nuts and Bolts of Psychotherapy
47
out of the therapy process. If there is doubt about the value of answering
the question, the therapist can certainly explore why the information is
important to the patient. Revealing one’s religion is rarely productive in
psychotherapy. If patient and therapist have different religions, some pa-
tients may feel that the therapist will never understand them. If the reli-
gion is the same, numerous assumptions may be made by the patient
about the therapist’s beliefs, some of which are likely to be erroneous. These
assumptions may not come up in the therapy if patients feel certain that
they know what the therapist believes.
Age and marital status are loaded issues in therapy, and the therapist
would do well to explore the reasons for the questions. Ultimately, the
therapist has a right to privacy. It is completely acceptable to tell a curi-
ous patient, “I don’t mean to be impolite, but I prefer to keep my private
life out of the therapy. This process is for you, and the focus must be on
how I can help you.”
Many questions come up in the course of therapy that are not partic-
ularly personal. Patients may ask their therapists if they have seen a par-
ticular film or television program. They may bring up a prominent person
and ask if the therapist knows whom they are talking about. Most thera-
pists freely answer such questions as a way of facilitating a spontaneous,
free-flowing exchange. Some questions are too personal to answer, of
course, but therapists should be wary of too much formality or rigidity in
their approach to the patient’s questions. The stereotype of turning all
questions back to the patient—“What do you think about that?”—may
inhibit the patient’s capacity to open up in psychotherapy.
What about the seating arrangement in the therapist’s office? While it
is customary in training clinics to have small offices with two chairs facing
each other, this arrangement may not be optimal for either patient or
therapist. Sitting across from one another may carry with it a sense of
obligatory eye contact that is distressing to both parties. If one looks away,
it may make one feel self-conscious, or at the very least, socially awkward.
By contrast, if the two chairs are arranged at a 45-degree angle to the wall
(see Figure 3–1), the patient may choose to look at the therapist or look
away if that feels more comfortable. The natural line of vision in this ar-
rangement makes eye contact less obligatory. Some issues are so embar-
rassing that patients may find it much easier to talk about them if they
are not under the therapist’s visual scrutiny.
This arrangement also facilitates the monitoring of the time during the
session. Most therapists feel self-conscious looking at the clock and may
attempt to sneak furtive glances at their watch or an office clock when
the patient looks away for a minute or sneezes. This “monitoring by stealth”
is less than optimal and can upset the patient, who sooner or later be-


--- PAGE 63 ---
48
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Figure 3–1.
Recommended seating arrangement (with therapist’s chair on the right).


--- PAGE 64 ---
The Nuts and Bolts of Psychotherapy
49
comes aware of the therapist’s tactic. Even if the therapist is quite open
about checking the time, some patients will feel slighted or hurt. They
may feel that the therapist is ignoring them or is bored with their mate-
rial. These reactions can, of course, be fruitfully explored with the patient
and may lead to productive work on similar situations where the patient
feels slighted. By having a clock on the wall across from the therapist’s
chair, however, the time can be monitored from one’s peripheral vision.
Some therapists prefer to have a desk clock on the table between the chairs
(along with some tissues) so that both parties can easily see the time dur-
ing the therapy.
Boundaries and Frame Issues
Long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy operates within a frame that
is composed of a set of professional boundaries, such as the location of
the session; the duration of the session; the fact that the therapist is paid
to deliver a service; the absence of physical contact (except for a hand-
shake in some cases); limited self-disclosure on the part of the therapist;
confidentiality; and the absence of dual relationships outside the therapy,
such as financial or business relationships, social get-togethers, or roman-
tic involvement. The entire setup is designed to be asymmetrical so that
the therapist’s unequivocal purpose is to help the patient with the prob-
lems that led to therapy.
Beginning therapists often misconstrue boundaries to imply rigidity.
The notion of a “frame” is perhaps problematic because it often conjures
up a visual image of an inflexible picture frame. The flexible ropes of a
boxing ring might make a better image (although an analogy with boxing
is problematic in other ways!), whereby the frame can be extended or re-
shaped for various reasons. Boundaries are designed to create an envelope
within which the therapist can be empathic, warm, and responsive and to
establish a holding environment where the patient feels understood and
validated. If a vacationing family visits the Grand Canyon, they will find
a guardrail that prevents them from falling into the abyss. Children (and
adults) can thus play and enjoy themselves without fearing disaster.
Similarly, the boundaries in therapy create a safe and secure context
within which therapist and patient can enter a “play space” where feelings,
perceptions, thoughts, and memories can be played with and explored.
The physical aspects of the frame allow the boundaries to be crossed psy-
chologically through empathy, projective identification, and introjection
(Gabbard and Lester 2003).
Moreover, boundaries are frequently stretched or even crossed to ac-
commodate a patient in some way or because the therapist enacts a coun-


--- PAGE 65 ---
50
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
tertransference response to the patient. An example of accommodating a
patient may occur when an elderly patient enters the office, trips on a rug,
and falls to the floor. The therapist jumps to her feet and helps the patient
up, asking if the patient is hurt. Ordinarily, the therapist refrains from
touching the patient, but in this case the therapist would be making a se-
rious error by sitting motionless and being unresponsive. The patient might
well choose not to come back.
An example of the occurrence of a countertransference response is
when a beginning therapist allowed a patient to stay in the office 15 min-
utes past the end of the hour because she felt sorry for the patient and
didn’t want to “throw her out.” The therapist explored this incident un-
der supervision and then brought it into the next session with the patient
to discuss how the exception had affected the patient. The patient re-
ported that the therapist had made her feel “special,” leading to an explo-
ration of how her mother had never made any exceptions for her. No
harm resulted from the extension of the hour, and the therapeutic discus-
sion was productive.
The two examples above represent boundary crossings as opposed to
boundary violations (Gabbard 2000; Gutheil and Gabbard 1993, 1998)
(see Table 3–1). They are breaks in the frame that are benign and even
helpful. They are attenuated (in the sense of being minor), usually occur
in isolation, and are discussable in the therapy. By contrast, boundary vi-
olations, such as sexual involvement, are exploitative, tend to be repeti-
tive, and usually are not discussable. In other words, when patients try to
bring up their concerns about the therapist’s kisses or hugs, the therapist
dismisses the concerns by saying they are part of the “real relationship”
and don’t require discussion (Gabbard and Lester 2003).
Table 3–1.
Boundary crossings versus boundary violations
Boundary crossings
Boundary violations
Are benign and even helpful breaks 
in the frame
Are exploitive breaks in the frame
Usually occur in isolation
Are usually repetitive
Are minor and attenuated in most 
cases
Are egregious and often extreme 
(e.g., sexual misconduct)
Are discussable in therapy
Therapist generally discourages 
discussion in therapy
Ultimately do not cause harm to 
patient
Typically cause harm to the patient 
and/or the therapy


--- PAGE 66 ---
The Nuts and Bolts of Psychotherapy
51
In the spirit of keeping boundaries flexible, therapists must recognize
that each therapist-patient dyad gradually constructs a frame that is
unique to the two of them. This interactive matrix (Greenberg 1995) in-
volves some compromise between the patient’s needs and the therapist’s
personal characteristics. Some patients may require a little more emo-
tional expressiveness, more verbal activity from the therapist, and even
more use of humor. Some patients may be lost if the therapist cannot
make minor accommodations to make the patient feel comfortable enough
to participate in therapy. Others may wish to have a therapist who is will-
ing to chat briefly about superficial news items or popular films. Some
therapists may be reasonably comfortable doing so, whereas others may
be private persons who prefer to keep their opinions to themselves. The
therapist-patient dyad works out some compromise or balance between
the two subjectivities present in the consulting room.
There are times when a therapist’s personal preferences may be chal-
lenged. A middle-aged patient came into a therapist’s office sobbing and
told him that she had just heard about the death of her son overseas. She
extended her arms to him to embrace the therapist, and he made a split-
second decision that, under the circumstances, it would be disastrous to
reject the embrace. So he gently returned her overture for a hug and held
her for a moment as she sobbed. He then sat her down in a chair to hear
more about what she was feeling. He did not feel comfortable hugging
the patient but felt that under the circumstances it was the lesser of two
evils. A hug occurred only once in the entire course of therapy and was
later discussable as the patient came out of her grief.
Many patients ask for hugs. Some even expect to be hugged because
hugging has been part of a previous therapy or a 12-step group they at-
tend. They may see a therapist as being cold and heartless for not hugging.
The problem for the therapist, however, is that one never knows in ad-
vance what the impact of a hug will be. Even when therapists have the
best intentions in embracing the patient, the impact on the patient may
be substantially different from the intent (Gutheil and Gabbard 1998).
A therapist may feel his hug is nonsexual, but the patient may have a his-
tory of childhood sexual abuse and be extraordinarily sensitive to any in-
vasion of her physical boundaries. She may feel sexually assaulted by a
hug, despite the therapist’s intent. Moreover, therapists can never be sure
of their own intentions. We are unconsciously enacting various needs of
our own when we relate to patients, and we can be masters of self-decep-
tion. We may think we are hugging a patient because he or she was de-
prived in childhood and therefore needs love in the present to make up
for what was missed in the past. However, we may be unconsciously act-
ing on our own sexual wishes or needs.


--- PAGE 67 ---
52
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Several rules of thumb are useful in deciding about any physical con-
tact beyond a handshake. It is rarely advisable for the therapist to initiate
a hug. If the patient initiates a hug and the therapist returns it, it should
be an extraordinary event under extraordinary circumstances in the ther-
apy. It should also be discussable—both with the patient and with one’s
supervisor. Regular embraces are likely to reflect the beginning of a de-
scent down the slippery slope of ever-increasing boundary violations
(Gutheil and Gabbard 1993).
Most egregious boundary violations, such as sexual relations with pa-
tients, begin with subtle countertransference enactments that may seem
benign initially. But they often snowball as therapists convince themselves
that what they are doing is simply accommodating to the patient’s needs
and furthering the process of the therapy. Often the first step down this
slippery slope is the self-disclosure by the therapist of personal problems,
leading to a role reversal. The patient becomes a sympathetic listener as the
therapist describes his or her own difficulties with a divorce, a sick child,
or a personal illness. The patient’s initial response to the disclosure may be
so positive that the therapist assumes it actually helps the patient to be
more open. Soon the patient may be comforting the therapist and provid-
ing a brief embrace at the end of the session as a way of bolstering the ther-
apist in a time of need. Hugs may progress to kisses, kisses may progress to
caresses, and soon the therapist and patient are meeting outside the office
for a rendezvous. Hence the frame must be monitored in terms of the de-
viations that are occurring. Therapists should talk about these deviations in
supervision, and they should note why deviations are being made so that
the reasons are clear and are justified by the overall treatment plan.
Countertransference is ubiquitous in psychotherapy. In fact, because
countertransference is primarily unconscious, we generally know about it
through actions that surprise us. These can be explored with a supervisor
or consultant on the one hand and with the patient, in terms of their
meaning, on the other.
A fundamental component of psychotherapy that may actually tran-
scend considerations of boundaries and frame is that the therapist is there
for the patient. Therapists don’t take phone calls or respond to pages dur-
ing sessions because their time belongs to the patient during the 45 or 50
minutes of the session. Emergencies occasionally arise, however, and there
are exceptions to this usual policy. However, these exceptions should be
rare and should be actively discussed with the patient. Additional time
may be offered at the end of the session to make up for the time during
which the phone call took place. If the emergency completely disrupts
the session, the therapist can offer to reschedule and not charge for the
interrupted session.


--- PAGE 68 ---
The Nuts and Bolts of Psychotherapy
53
Note taking is often helpful during an evaluation to be sure that the
historical facts are noted correctly and to retain essential information for
developing a treatment plan. However, note taking during a psychother-
apy session may interfere with the development of rapport and empathy.
It may also disrupt the therapist’s immersion in the countertransference
produced by the patient so that important information for the therapy
becomes obscured. Therapists may want to jot down a few notes for su-
pervision about key interventions they made or themes that the patient
brought up. These notes, however, are best done after the session before
the next patient arrives or later in the day.
The notes describing the session are called psychotherapy process notes
and should be kept separate from the patient’s primary chart or medical
record. When a patient requests a medical record or a legal action results
in subpoena of a record, the psychotherapist’s process notes are not dis-
coverable if they have been kept in a separate file. They are regarded as
the therapist’s property, and therefore trainee therapists can feel free to
write down notes about their own countertransference or their impres-
sions of the patient, some of which they may prefer not to have the pa-
tient read. By contrast, the official progress notes in the chart may be read
by the patient or by anyone involved in a litigation process and thus should
be brief and respectful of the patient’s confidentiality. Such notes might
touch on broad themes in the therapy, such as “The patient discussed his
complicated relationships with women today, and we explored how that
related to transference issues.” Important material that has potential legal
consequences may also be included in these notes, such as medication re-
actions and changes, suicidal thoughts, or major decisions about the treat-
ment.
Fees
Fees are among the most difficult problems for beginning therapists.
Most beginners feel that they don’t really deserve a fee, because they are
inexperienced and just learning the craft. However, therapy is hard work,
and practitioners deserve to be paid for it. Bills might be allowed to ac-
cumulate because a trainee therapist is reluctant to broach the issue.
Among the fears that the therapist might have are that the patient will
quit therapy or that it may seem insensitive to discuss the patient’s failure
to pay.
Feelings of anger and aggression often lurk behind the issue of the fee.
Beginning therapists must remember that the fee is an ever-present re-
minder that the therapeutic relationship is not a friendship, is not a family
relationship, and is not a romantic relationship. Winnicott (1954) pointed


--- PAGE 69 ---
54
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
out that both love and hate are inherent in the therapeutic relationship.
The provision of empathic understanding in a holding environment is ex-
perienced as loving and caring by the patient. However, the patient may
construe the fee and the time constraints as reflecting hate and aggres-
sion. Many patients harbor a wish for the therapist to be the perfect par-
ent they missed having in childhood. If the therapist does not charge, the
patient might begin to think that this idealized fantasy figure has finally
been found. When patients are confronted about the bill, they may in-
deed become angry, but the exploration of their expectations regarding
payment may be extraordinarily productive for the therapy. They may re-
veal barely conscious fantasies of being taken care of without having to
be responsible to pay the bill.
Beginning therapists must remember the old saying, “You get what
you pay for.” A therapy that is being provided in essence for free, since
the bill is not being collected, may convey a message to the patient that
what is being provided is not worth much. Also, if the therapist is reluc-
tant to bring up the bill for countertransference reasons, what does the
patient make of this reticence? Is the therapist so self-denigrating that
payment seems inappropriate? Psychotherapy should involve some de-
gree of sacrifice by the patient. If no sacrifice is necessary, patients might
wish that the process will go on forever and might not feel mobilized to
work toward the completion of goals. Many training clinics have sliding
scales, and when the therapist departs from those scales, the reason should
be clear and should be thoroughly discussed with a supervisor.
When trainees graduate from their training program and enter prac-
tice, they rapidly realize that charging too low a fee can lead to resent-
ment on the therapist’s part. The patient is unlikely to receive optimal
treatment if the therapist is resentful about the financial arrangements.
This resentment may well be present in training settings too:
A third-year resident was seeing a patient in a public hospital outpatient
clinic, where the patient paid nothing. However, the therapist had to use
a parking garage that cost her $5.00 each time she went to the therapy
appointment. She gradually noted that the therapy was actually costing
her instead of the patient. She often felt that she was the one making sac-
rifices instead of the patient. To her credit, she recognized this specific
countertransference response and discussed it with her supervisor.
Patients may well sense the beginning therapist’s reluctance to set a
reasonable fee and to insist on payment. They may take advantage of this
vulnerability in the therapist by insisting on a low fee even though they
are spending money on a variety of items that may seem frivolous by
comparison to therapy. One beginning therapist had asked for a special


--- PAGE 70 ---
The Nuts and Bolts of Psychotherapy
55
exception to the training clinic’s policy of a sliding fee scale. His patient
was paying only $20 per session for the therapy, and he told his therapist
that even that amount was a hardship in light of his limited budget. The
therapist was chagrined to learn later that his patient took a trip to Ha-
waii when he had a week off from work. The patient even told the ther-
apist how wonderfully relaxing the trip had been!
Gifts
Patients often feel like bringing their therapist a gift. Although gifts were
once thought to be completely off limits in psychodynamic psychotherapy
and psychoanalysis, the thinking on this matter has changed over time. In-
expensive gifts or items the patient has made may be accepted with grat-
itude from some patients at some points in therapy. At times, it may be
devastating to the therapeutic alliance and to the patient’s self-esteem if
such gifts are declined. Some patients need to feel they can give some-
thing back to the therapist, and the refusal of gifts can be a shaming ex-
perience that some patients may have difficulty getting over.
On the other hand, gifts can also be used as unconscious bribes to
curry favor with the therapist or to manipulate the therapist into a collu-
sion with the patient about the avoidance of certain difficult issues in the
therapy or as a way of fending off any aggression or anger in the therapist.
Therefore, even if gifts are accepted, the meaning of the gift should gen-
erally be explored with the patient to evaluate the possibility of hidden
meanings attached to the gift.
The therapist is occasionally in a position where the appropriate course
of action is ambiguous. Therapists may be uncertain about the cost of a
gift, or they may worry that the patient’s feelings will be hurt if they de-
cline the gift. Another situation that may be ambiguous is the cultural
meaning of gifts. For example, when a trainee therapist turned down a
gift of cash from a Middle Eastern patient, the patient informed him that
in his country they had a saying, “He who rejects my gift is my enemy.”
In situations of ambiguity, the therapist may wish to defer a decision on
the gift. The patient can be told that the therapist needs to discuss the
gift with a supervisor or to check on clinic policy before making a deci-
sion. In these situations, the therapist may keep the gift in the office or
have the patient keep it and bring it back at the next meeting.
Confidentiality Concerns
A sense of privacy is an essential part of the frame of psychotherapy. Pa-
tients will not disclose their darkest secrets and most shameful fantasies


--- PAGE 71 ---
56
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
unless they feel that their confidences will be kept. Beginning therapists
understand this principle, but they also present psychotherapy process
material to supervisors and hear presentations in clinical case conferences
where confidential patient communications are openly discussed. This
atmosphere may lead to a looseness about confidentiality that can be
highly problematic.
Trainee psychotherapists should be reminded that confidentiality is not
to be treated lightly in any circumstance. Therapists should not be speaking
about their patients to their spouses or family members. If they see a pa-
tient in a restaurant or at a public event, they should not acknowledge the
patient openly unless the patient speaks first, nods, or waves. Some patients
will prefer to keep the fact that they see a therapist completely private and
will not even acknowledge their therapist when they are with family mem-
bers. Even the fact that one is seeing a patient is confidential. Hence, if
someone asks a therapist, “Do you see Jane Smith?” the best answer is some-
thing like, “I can’t reveal whom I see or don’t see in therapy because of con-
fidentiality concerns.” Even the material that one hears in psychotherapy
should remain confidential. For example, if one hears titillating gossip about
a mutual acquaintance or friend through a patient, that material should not
be repeated to anyone. When one must use case material for a presentation
in a teaching conference, the identifying features of the patient should be
carefully disguised so the identity is not clear to the listeners. If a trainee in
a case presentation starts to feel that he or she might know who the patient
is, the trainee should discreetly leave the conference.
Beginning therapists may be caught in a difficult dilemma if a family
member of a patient calls them. Some family members may wish to be
given a progress report on the patient. Others may want to inform the ther-
apist about patient behavior that they believe the patient is not reporting
to the therapist. In such circumstances, the therapist may patiently listen
to what the family member has to say, but then the therapist is obligated
to explain to the family member that what goes on in psychotherapy is
confidential and thus nothing can be revealed to the family member. Be-
cause of the potential for damage to the alliance if the patient finds out
the therapist has been talking to a family member, the therapist must also
inform the caller that the patient will need to be told about the call at the
next psychotherapy session.
Summary
The first order of business in beginning a psychotherapy process is to es-
tablish a therapeutic alliance by listening empathically to the patient’s


--- PAGE 72 ---
The Nuts and Bolts of Psychotherapy
57
concerns. Certain questions that patients ask us at the beginning of ther-
apy may need to be answered directly, whereas others fall into a gray area
where clinical judgment must be used to determine the appropriate re-
sponse. Long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy must occur within a
frame that is composed of a set of professional boundaries. These bound-
aries—including the fee, the office setting, the absence of physical con-
tact, the absence of dual relationships with the patient, the duration of the
session, and limited self-disclosure by the therapist—are designed to cre-
ate a safe and secure context where the patient can feel free to say or feel
anything without concern about adverse consequences to the relation-
ship. Benign breaks in the frame, referred to as boundary crossings, should
be differentiated from boundary violations. The former are helpful trans-
gressions of the frame that usually occur in isolation, are minor in nature,
and are ultimately discussable with the patient. Boundary violations, on the
other hand, are frequently repetitive, are not discussable, and are harmful
to the patient.
Note taking during sessions should be avoided so that rapport with the
patient and an immersion in the patient’s experience are possible. Begin-
ning therapists often have a difficult time charging and collecting fees,
and this difficulty should be addressed in supervision rather than avoided.
Confidentiality is sacrosanct, and therapists should always be mindful of
situations where confidential information may leak out unintentionally.
References
Frieswyck SH, Allen JG, Colson DB, et al: Therapeutic alliance: its place as a pro-
cess and outcome variable in dynamic psychotherapy research. J Consult
Clin Psychol 54:32–38, 1986
Gabbard GO: Psychodynamic Psychotherapy in Clinical Practice, 3rd Edition.
Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 2000
Gabbard GO, Lester E: Boundaries and Boundary Violations in Psychoanalysis.
Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Publishing, 2003 
Gibbons MGC, Crits-Christoph P, de la Cruz, et al: Pretreatment expectations,
interpersonal functioning, and symptoms in the prediction of the therapeutic
alliance across supportive-expressive psychotherapy and cognitive therapy.
Psychotherapy Research 13:59–76, 2003
Greenberg JR: Psychoanalytic technique and the interactive matrix. Psychoanal Q
64:1–22, 1995
Gutheil TG, Gabbard GO: The concept of boundaries in clinical practice: theo-
retical and risk management dimensions. Am J Psychiatry 150:188–196,
1993
Gutheil TG, Gabbard GO: Misuses and misunderstandings of boundary theory in
clinical and regulatory settings. Am J Psychiatry 155:409–414, 1998


--- PAGE 73 ---
58
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Horvath AD, Symonds BD: Relation between working alliance and outcome in
psychotherapy: a meta-analysis. J Couns Psychol 38:139–149, 1991
Horwitz L, Gabbard GO, Allen JG, et al: Borderline Personality Disorder: Tailor-
ing the Psychotherapy to the Patient. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric
Press, 1996
Krupnick JL, Sotsky SM, Simmens S, et al: The role of therapeutic alliance in
psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy outcome: findings in the National In-
stitute of Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research
Program. J Consult Clin Psychol 64:532–539, 1996
Luborsky L: Principles of Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy: A Manual for Supportive-
Expressive Treatment. New York, Basic Books, 1984
Martin DJ, Garske JP, Davis KK: Relation of the therapeutic alliance with out-
come and other variables: a meta-analytic review. J Consult Clin Psychol 68:
438–450, 2000
Poland WS: The analyst’s witnessing and otherness. J Am Psychoanal Assoc 48:
16–35, 2000
Winnicott DW: Metapsychological and clinical aspects of regression within the
psycho-analytic set-up, in Collected Papers: Through Pediatrics to Psycho-
Analysis. New York, Basic Books, 1954


--- PAGE 74 ---
59
Therapeutic Interventions
What Does the Therapist Say and Do?
If they have innate talent, most beginning psychotherapists can establish
rapport and listen empathically to the patient’s story. Then they begin to
ask themselves two basic questions: what do I say, and what do I do? Im-
ages of the blank-screen, silent therapist usually haunt them. Most begin-
ners are inclined to think they are reacting too spontaneously, saying too
much, and being too active in their engagement with the patient. All
these things are possible, of course, but a more likely scenario is that the
young therapist—fearing spontaneity, human engagement, and a natural-
ness of response—is overly rigid and formal.
Neutrality, Anonymity, and Abstinence
Three principles of technique that are often attributed to Freud—neu-
trality, anonymity, and abstinence—have created misunderstandings in
new therapists for decades. Freud himself did not actually subscribe to
these principles in his own clinical work (Lohser and Newton 1996), and
he probably admonished his disciples for fear that they would engage in
wild analysis and damage the reputation of his young science. In the last
couple of decades, psychoanalysis and psychodynamic therapy have un-
dergone a sea change in how the therapist’s participation is defined. Few
would regard as desirable the outmoded image of the therapist as a stone-


--- PAGE 75 ---
60
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
faced cipher. All three of these terms are useful to some degree, but only
in a relative sense. None of them should lead a beginning therapist to be
cold, aloof, or remote from the patient.
Neutrality was never intended to imply coldness or remoteness. The
most widely accepted view of the term has been to retain equidistance
from the id, ego, superego, and external reality. Those metapsychological
constructs are often difficult for a therapist to locate, however, and put-
ting the definition into action may be a formidable challenge. The under-
lying principle, which is still valid to some degree, is that a psychodynamic
therapist tries to remain nonjudgmental about the patient’s wishes, long-
ings, and even behaviors to some degree, in the service of understanding
them. Patients are much more likely to open up to a therapist if they feel
understood rather than judged.
One of the major difficulties in implementing a nonjudgmental atmo-
sphere in psychotherapy is that therapists are privately passing judgments
on the patient all the time. How can any one of us consistently keep our
feelings, reactions, and opinions from showing? We are making a host of
judgments in every session with the patient. We have opinions about how
patients dress, what they say, whom they choose for a romantic partner,
what they do in bed, how they spend their money, and how they choose
to spend their time in psychotherapy. At the same time, however, a psy-
chodynamic psychotherapist endorses the principle that patients should
have autonomy to make their own decisions in their lives. Above all, the
therapy should not be coercive.
Fortunately, on many matters of importance to the patient, the thera-
pist may be able to maintain a reasonably nonjudgmental attitude. A pa-
tient who has complicated marital problems, for example, may obsess
about the pros and cons of getting a divorce. A therapist may be able to
see both sides of the patient’s dilemma and maintain a position of reason-
able neutrality as the patient ultimately makes the decision. On other
matters, such as the abuse of a child, the committing of a crime, or the
refusal to pay the therapy bill, the therapist may have unequivocal re-
actions that are clear to the patient. At times it is even useful to acknowl-
edge those feelings to the patient. Therapists who don’t react to reports
of egregious crimes or instances of cruelty, for example, may be seen as
tacitly endorsing the patient’s behavior and colluding with the patient’s
rationalization that it is somehow acceptable.
This discussion of neutrality leads directly into the concept of anonym-
ity. It is now widely accepted that therapists are self-disclosing in a variety
of ways all the time. The choice of art and photographs in the therapist’s
office, the way the therapist changes facial expressions in response to var-
ious comments by the patient, and even the therapist’s choice of when to
