

--- PAGE 126 ---
Working With Resistance
111
to help you, only to dismiss their help when you ultimately decide what
to do. This is one way that your aggression seeps out of you even though
you try to control it as much as you can.”
In this clinical vignette, Dr. K used a here-and-now process to help ex-
plicate how Mr. J tried to defend against his anger and aggression unsuc-
cessfully. His tendency to control the sessions by being overinclusive, his
insistence on getting the therapist’s opinion only to undo it, and his par-
alyzing indecisiveness all led others to feel exasperated with him, includ-
ing his therapist. Over time the therapist was able to help the patient
track his own concerns about anger and aggression and the defensive style
by which he resisted the therapist’s help.
Dr. K also worked to help Mr. J recognize that he operated with the
assumption that there was one correct choice for every decision. This be-
lief led to the idea that he had to identify the “right answer” before acting.
Dr. K ultimately helped him to understand that when faced with a choice,
either decision could ultimately work out, depending on how he dealt with
the choice after committing himself to it.
Because the patient’s characterological resistance took the form of ri-
gidity and isolation of affect, Mr. J seldom expressed humor. The thera-
pist also tried to inject humor into the decision-making process whenever
it seemed appropriate. Mr. J eventually could laugh and recognize the in-
herent absurdity of his perfectionistic goal.
Flight Into Health
Another common mode of resistance is demonstrated when patients as-
sert that they have been “cured” early in the therapy before things have
been thoroughly explored. These flights into health are defensive ways of
avoiding discussions of painful conflicts or affect states. The therapist may
wish to help the patient determine how many of the goals established at
the beginning of the therapy have actually been attained. It may also be
useful for the therapist to empathize with the patient’s underlying anxi-
ety about reflecting on what is happening inside.
Flights into health at times lead to early or premature termination of
therapy. A general rule of thumb is that the first time a patient brings up
termination, the decision is probably serving a resistance function. Al-
though this rule of thumb is not absolute, it is certainly worth considering
when the patient is wishing to terminate therapy before a number of is-
sues have been examined. However, there will be times when the patient
is insistent on termination, even though the therapist thinks it may be ill-
advised. In such cases, the therapist is probably wise to accept the deci-


--- PAGE 127 ---
112
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
sion and pave the way for the patient’s return. The timing of termination
of therapy is discussed further in Chapter 9 (“Working Through and Ter-
mination”).
Lateness and Missed Sessions
Two of the most common forms of resistance are lateness and missed ses-
sions. Some patients are characterologically late and are virtually never
on time, while others are late only when something about the therapy is
troubling them. Some patients are extraordinarily concerned about punc-
tuality and feel it is irresponsible when they come a few minutes late. Oth-
ers feel no concern whatsoever about keeping people waiting for them and
rarely mention their lateness.
Therapists have to carefully assess the particular meanings of lateness
for each patient and the patient’s reaction to the lateness. The way the
therapist intervenes depends on the characteristics of the individual pa-
tient and the specific situation. For example, in someone who shows no
anxiety whatsoever about arriving late and keeping the therapist waiting,
the therapist may wish to promote mentalization. At a well-timed mo-
ment, the therapist might ask, “Do you have any thoughts about what
I might have been feeling while waiting for you today?” The patient may
not have considered the therapist’s internal state and not contemplated
the impact the lateness has on the therapist. To help the patient begin to
mentalize about the therapist’s internal reactions may require a number
of such interventions until the patient becomes more curious about the
therapist’s internal world. The therapist can then generalize from the
transference situation into outside relationships where the patient keeps
people waiting. Is there a sense of entitlement that others should adjust
their schedules to his? Does the patient express anger toward others by
keeping them waiting? Was the patient made to wait as a child in situations
with his parents or siblings, for which he is now seeking revenge by mak-
ing others wait for him?
In any case, the therapist is well advised to maintain the time frame as
originally established. If the session is to begin at 2:00 and end at 2:45,
the session should end at 2:45, even if the patient does not appear until
2:20. If the therapist extends the session, the patient receives the uncon-
scious message that it is alright to expect others adjust to his schedule. If
the patient gets angry because the therapist maintains the time frame,
this anger may lead to useful exploration about the patient’s pattern of
lateness.
When patients who are ordinarily punctual come late to therapy ses-
sions, therapists might be inclined to address the lateness immediately, but


--- PAGE 128 ---
Working With Resistance
113
this often promotes defensiveness. A better strategy is to see how the pa-
tient explains her lateness and whether she sees it as having any meaning
for the therapy or as being simply the result of traffic problems or other
external matters. Although reality factors do conspire to make people late
for appointments at times, therapists should always keep in mind that re-
sistance finds the best hiding place. Even if traffic is particularly slow, the
circumstance of being delayed in traffic can provide a convenient hiding
place for anxieties that the patient has about bringing up difficult issues
with the therapist. At the same time, the therapist does not want to push
the agenda of resistance when the patient is simply not open to exploring
it. The underlying concerns of the patient will undoubtedly return in fu-
ture sessions and can be examined at that point. Another factor worth ex-
ploring is whether the patient is coming late as a way of avoiding a return
to an issue or discussion that occurred in the previous session that she
found troubling.
Missed sessions are another common form of resistance, and one of the
reasons many therapists charge for missed sessions in psychotherapy is that
this practice often results in much better attendance. Patients who are not
charged when they miss therapy may have a host of rationalizations for ab-
sences. When they are expected to pay whether or not they show up, ab-
sences mysteriously evaporate along with the excuses for them. For this
reason Freud (1913/1958) advocated “leasing” an hour to the patient:
Under a less stringent regime the “occasional” non-attendances increase so
greatly that the doctor finds his material existence threatened; whereas
when the arrangement is adhered to, it turns out that accidental hin-
drances do not occur at all and intercurrent illnesses only very seldom....
Nothing brings home to one so strongly the significance of the psycho-
genic factor in the daily life of men, the frequency of malingering and the
non-existence of chance, as a few years’ practice of psycho-analysis on the
strict principle of leasing by the hour. (p. 127)
In today’s climate of clinical practice, implementing Freud’s recom-
mendations may be difficult. Some insurance companies and governmen-
tal third parties will not pay for missed appointments. If the patient is
paying out of pocket, however, many therapists still contract with the pa-
tient to pay for missed sessions before starting the treatment (unless, of
course, they are able to fill the opening with another patient). Others use
variations of this policy that allows for some flexibility. For example,
some therapists may charge unless the patient gives them 24 hours’ notice
of the absence. Others allow a limited number of sessions per year to be
missed without billing for them. Bona fide emergencies or serious ill-
nesses are also treated as exceptions by many therapists.


--- PAGE 129 ---
114
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Beginning therapists often wonder if it is advisable to call patients who
do not show up for their psychotherapy sessions. If suicidality is a con-
cern, therapists probably should call the patient to check on the patient’s
safety. On the other hand, some chronically suicidal patients with bor-
derline personality disorder may take advantage of the therapist’s anxiety
about a potential for suicide and begin to expect a call from the therapist
as a regular response to not appearing for a session. If this pattern devel-
ops, the therapist certainly needs to take it up with the patient and ex-
amine the patient’s motives.
With patients who are not suicidal or self-destructive, most therapists
would not call after one missed session. However, if two consecutive ses-
sions are missed, it is probably a good idea to telephone the patient and
see if he or she is interested in continuing therapy or if some external cir-
cumstance has occurred that has kept him or her from attending. Patients
who say they have decided to quit therapy should be invited to come for
one more session and explore the pros and cons of that decision, while mak-
ing it clear that ultimately therapy is a voluntary endeavor and that it is
entirely up to the patient whether or not to continue.
Summary
Resistance is an everyday aspect of the dynamic psychotherapist’s work.
Whereas the term was originally applied to patients in analysis who stopped
free associating, it has now taken on a much broader meaning of almost
anything that opposes the work of the psychotherapy. In particular, it
manifests itself as nonreflective action rather than a stated divided con-
sciousness whereby the patient is participating in the work of therapy
while simultaneously engaging in self-observation. Acting in refers to non-
verbal behavior observable by the therapist that has significant meanings
requiring explanation. Acting out, on the other hand, generally refers to
behavior outside the session that has some meaning in terms of transfer-
ence issues.
Many forms of resistance involve transference, and often the patient’s
fantasy about what the therapist is thinking or who the therapist is inter-
feres with the patient’s capacity to do productive work in therapy. On the
other hand, patients may also resist awareness of the transference and
proceed with the therapy as though the therapist is not a significant figure
to them. Sometimes only at the end of the hour, when the patient goes to
the door and hurls a parting shot, known as an exit line, will the transfer-
ence to the therapist emerge. Hence exit lines should be carefully noted.
Many patients have characterological resistances that are embedded in long-


--- PAGE 130 ---
Working With Resistance
115
standing defenses and internal object relations that serve to resist the
therapist’s efforts. Other common forms of resistance involve flights into
health, lateness, and missed sessions.
References
Freud S: The dynamics of transference (1912), in The Standard Edition of the
Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol 12. Translated and
edited by Strachey J. London, Hogarth Press, 1958, pp 99–108
Freud S: On beginning the treatment (1913), in The Standard Edition of the
Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol 12. Translated and
edited by Strachey J. London, Hogarth Press, 1958, pp 123–144
Freud S: Remembering, repeating, and working through (1914), in The Standard
Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol 12.
Translated and edited by Strachey J. London, Hogarth Press, 1958, pp 147–
156
Friedman L: A reading of Freud’s papers on technique. Psychoanal Q 60:564–
595, 1991
Gabbard GO: The exit line: heightened transference-countertransference mani-
festations at the end of the hour. J Am Psychoanal Assoc 30:579–598, 1982
Gill MM: Analysis of Transference, Vol 1: Theory and Technique. New York,
International Universities Press, 1982
Gray P: The nature of therapeutic action in psychoanalysis. J Am Psychoanal
Assoc 38:1083–1096, 1990
Kohut H: How Does Analysis Cure? Edited by Goldberg A. Chicago, IL, Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1984
Paniagua C: Acting in revisited: Int J Psychoanal 79:499–512, 1998


--- PAGE 131 ---
This page intentionally left blank 


--- PAGE 132 ---
117
7
Use of Dreams and 
Fantasies in Dynamic 
Psychotherapy
The study of dreams has always been a valued part of psychoanalysis and
psychodynamic therapy. Freud (1900/1953) viewed the interpretation
of dreams as the “royal road” to the unconscious. Core conflicts may be
so troubling to a patient that they are banished from the patient’s waking
thoughts. However, when the defensive vigilance dissipates with the on-
set of sleep, the conflicts may emerge in dream material. Some would
question whether dreams are still the royal road because we now view
transference, resistance, and nonverbal behavior as other avenues to un-
conscious issues, but the understanding of dreams continues to be a ma-
jor tool of the dynamic therapist.
Neuroscience research on dreaming and rapid eye movement (REM)
sleep has proliferated in the past 30 years. Although some investigators
(Hobson 1988) have tried to minimize the psychodynamic importance of
dreams by emphasizing neurophysiological findings, Reiser (2001) em-
phasized that the neurophysiological domain and the psychodynamic do-
main are not interchangeable. Neuroscience findings cannot disprove the
psychodynamic value of dreams. Mind and brain use different languages
and techniques, and the dreamer’s mind appropriates the dreaming brain’s
physiological state to depict meaningful psychological issues. Hence many
of the time-honored principles of psychoanalytic dream interpretation
continue to apply in the work of the contemporary dynamic therapist.


--- PAGE 133 ---
118
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Dreams
Understanding Dreams
One of the core psychoanalytic tenets is that a dream is a disguised ver-
sion of a wish. Freud insisted that unconscious childhood wishes were
transformed into disguised symbols through a censor that made sure the
dreamer’s sleep would not be disturbed. Freud distinguished between two
layers of dream content. The manifest content is the dream’s surface as per-
ceived by the dreamer. The latent content refers to unconscious wishes and
thoughts that threaten to awaken the dreamer and therefore must be dis-
guised. A set of defense mechanisms that operate within the dreamer’s ego
serve to disguise the latent content and transform it into manifest content.
Today we would recognize that dreams may depict other internal pro-
cesses besides unconscious childhood wishes. They also represent fears,
conflicts, and (in the case of traumatized patients) recurrent efforts to mas-
ter and metabolize traumatic experiences. Nevertheless, the defense mech-
anisms used by the dreamer’s ego continue to be useful in trying to deci-
pher the meaning of the dream.
• Condensation.
This mechanism combines more than one wish, feel-
ing, or impulse in one manifest dream image. One figure in a dream,
for example, may have the bald head of one person, the beard of an-
other person, and the clothing of a third person. The feelings associ-
ated with these three different individuals may thus be disguised and
become apparent only through psychotherapeutic work on the dream.
• Displacement.
In this mechanism, the intensity that is associated with
one person may be diverted to a separate person to become more ac-
ceptable to the dreamer’s ego. For example, the dreamer may feel that
it is forbidden to have sexual feelings for one’s therapist, so the feelings
are displaced onto another person in the patient’s life.
• Symbolic representation.
This method of disguise involves the use of
a simple concrete sensory image to represent a complex set of feelings
that may be highly charged. Freud (1900/1953) suggested that a flower,
for example, is a common representation of female genitalia. The in-
side of a house may depict the inside of one’s mind. However, Freud
also stressed that most dream symbols are used idiosyncratically by
each dreamer, and the unconscious meaning can be discerned only
through hearing the patient’s associations to the material. The arbi-
trary assignment of meanings to dream symbols, such as can be found
in publications sold in supermarket checkout lines, has little value. A
special instance of symbolic representation is called synecdoche, when


--- PAGE 134 ---
Use of Dreams and Fantasies in Dynamic Psychotherapy
119
a part stands for a whole. For example, in referring to sailboats, one
might say, “I saw at least 15 sails on the sea today,” indicating 15 sail-
boats. This figure of speech is regularly incorporated in dreams that
represent a whole by depicting a part.
• Secondary revision.
Mechanisms of displacement, condensation, and
symbolic representation are characteristic of a primitive mode of cog-
nitive activity that Freud referred to as primary process. More advanced
and reasonable aspects of the ego serve to organize these primitive el-
ements into a more coherent framework. This process, known as sec-
ondary revision, involves an effort by the dreamer to take the irrational
and bizarre components of a dream and edit them into a more rational
story. Even after the dreamer has awakened and begins to remember
or write down the dream to tell it in therapy, further changes may occur
as the dreamer attempts to make the dream content more coherent.
Therefore the dream that is told in psychotherapy may be significantly
different from the one that was dreamt.
Another important concept originated by Freud is the day residue. An
event that occurred during the day may appear in disguised form in a
dream. In Dorothy’s dream in The Wizard of Oz, the three farmhands she
encounters before the tornado appear in disguised form in her dream as
the Scarecrow, the Tin Man, and the Cowardly Lion. Miss Gulch becomes
the Wicked Witch of the West. A dynamic therapist often looks for ele-
ments of the day residue in collaboration with the patient as the dream
is understood and interpreted.
Technique of Dream Interpretation
One central concept in psychodynamic therapy and psychoanalysis is
that the understanding of a dream requires the associations of the patient
to that dream. Therapists should avoid taking an omniscient stance of
telling the patient what a dream means without first listening to the pa-
tient’s thoughts about the dream. Thus a useful way to approach the pro-
cess of dream interpretation is to say to the patient after he or she has fin-
ished telling the dream, “What comes to mind as you think about the
dream?” Sometimes the manifest content so obviously depicts a major is-
sue in the dreamer’s life that associations may seem unnecessary. Never-
theless, a therapist is still wise to postpone interpreting the dream until
the patient has associated about the dream content. Often the dreamer’s
associations take the dream in an unexpected direction. Specifically, one
always hopes that associations will illuminate how the dreamer has trans-
formed the latent content into the manifest content.


--- PAGE 135 ---
120
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
In psychotherapeutic work with dreams, numerous resistances may
emerge. Patients may view the therapist as a soothsayer who can discern
the true meaning of the dream without the patient’s help. Some patients
may say they have no associations and look to the therapist to explain the
dream in the manner of a television psychic. In such cases, the therapist
may need to remind the patient that psychotherapy is a collaborative en-
deavor and that the therapist is unable to interpret the dream without the
patient’s help. Highly competitive patients may try to beat the therapist
to the punch by interpreting the meaning of the dream instead of freely
associating to it. They may tell the therapist what they think each symbol
means in a controlling and highly intellectualized fashion to avoid drop-
ping their defenses and letting their mind wander in the manner of free
association. A third common form of resistance in work with dreams is
that certain highly charged dream images are avoided in the patient’s as-
sociations. This avoidance frequently occurs around depictions of the
therapist in a dream, and the therapist may need to ask the patient spe-
cifically what comes to mind about the avoided dream image. Indeed, a
common technical strategy is to ask the patient directly about certain
dream images that seem to be of relevance from the therapist’s point of
view.
Dreams themselves may be used as a powerful resistance to psycho-
therapy. One occasionally sees a patient who will flood the entire session
with dream material, leaving no time to work with the therapist on any
of the dreams. Such a patient may jump from one dream to another with-
out pausing to associate to the dream material, so the therapist is over-
whelmed with the task of trying to keep track of the different dreams and
what they depict. A dream might also be brought up at the end of the
hour in “exit line” fashion so that there is no time to analyze the dream.
One’s dreams can serve as a royal detour away from the unconscious as
well as a royal road to it.
Some clinical examples of dream work in psychotherapy illustrate
some of the foregoing concepts.
Ms. L was a 27-year-old woman who was undergoing dynamic psycho-
therapy twice weekly with Dr. M. She had an older sister (age 32) whom
she always felt had been the apple of her father’s eye and with whom she
was extremely competitive. Her sister was a physician like her father, but
Ms. L was in a totally unrelated field. She longed for her father’s atten-
tion, but she always felt she could not compete with her sister. After a
Thanksgiving weekend at the family home, she returned to therapy on
Monday morning and reported a dream that had occurred on Sunday night.
The patient was in a house, and she heard noises in another room. She
walked into the other room and found her older sister in bed with her fa-
ther. She woke up at that point.


--- PAGE 136 ---
Use of Dreams and Fantasies in Dynamic Psychotherapy
121
The therapist asked what came to mind about the dream. Ms. L re-
sponded with silence and then said, “Nothing.” Dr. M empathized with
the patient’s embarrassment and said, “It is very disturbing to imagine an
incestuous relationship between your father and your sister, even in a
dream.” This empathic comment helped the patient to feel understood,
and then she began to associate, “Yes, it is embarrassing to talk about this
with you. It doesn’t surprise me, though, in a way.” Dr. M asked, “Why
not?” Ms. L explained: “Well, last night my father took my sister and me
to the airport so we could catch our flights home. He hugged me and kissed
me on the cheek, and then he went to hug and kiss her, and she kissed
him squarely on the lips. I couldn’t believe it. They seemed like two lov-
ers.” Here Ms. L associates to the day residue that undoubtedly triggered
the dream. Dr. M said, “It must have seemed almost like they were in bed
together.” Ms. L replied, “But in the dream they were not having sex in the
bed.” Here the defensive forces of the waking ego come to the rescue to
make sure that something unacceptable depicted in the dream was not as
bad as it may have appeared. Dr. M took the material a bit further by say-
ing, “Yes, I understand that, but at times you have felt very excluded by
their relationship, as though they were in the parental bedroom together
and you were on the outside looking in.” Ms. L continued her associations:
“The whole Thanksgiving weekend they talked about medicine nonstop.
I felt that I was not part of their relationship, and I think my mother felt
the same way. It was almost as though those two were a married couple,
and the rest of us were excluded. I hate to say this, but I am still so jealous
of her.” Dr. M responded, “There’s probably a part of you that would like
to be in the parental bedroom with your dad in your sister’s place.” Ms. L
nodded, reluctantly admitting that she had always wanted to be her fa-
ther’s favorite.
In this bit of dream work, the dreamer disguises her wish to have her
father to herself and to triumph over her sister by the use of displace-
ment. It is her sister, not she, who is actually in bed with the father. The
day residue served as a useful vehicle to disguise this wish. Because Dr. M
and Ms. L had a strong therapeutic alliance that had developed over
many months of therapy, he was able to help her see the displacement
based on having worked through the same theme over and over again in
the therapy. The sister may have also served as a displacement from Ms. L’s
mother in the dream, the patient’s original rival for her father’s attention.
However, this reference was too far from Ms. L’s conscious awareness to
bring it up, so Dr. M chose to keep it to himself.
Another case illustrates the mechanism of symbolic representation, and
particularly synecdoche.
Ms. N was a 42-year-old woman who came to psychotherapy after the
death of her son from muscular dystrophy. She was a stoic woman who
had defended against her grief by becoming active in the local muscular
dystrophy organization and by insisting that helping others kept her from


--- PAGE 137 ---
122
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
feeling sad about her son. Nevertheless, she would occasionally tear up
as she talked about him, only to flee from her feelings when they became
uncomfortable.
One day Ms. N came to therapy and said, “I had a dream last night.
I don’t know what to make of it. It was a very short dream. I looked at my
fingernails, and they were all broken.” The therapist asked her what came
into her mind as she thought about that image of broken fingernails. She
hesitated a moment and then said that when she was changing her son’s
bed sheets, which was a frequent necessity during his last days alive, she
would often break her fingernails. She reflected on how completely ridic-
ulous it was to worry about such minor trivia as a broken fingernail when
her son was dying. Her therapist tuned into the meaning of the dream and
said, “In some ways it would be nice to have broken fingernails again, be-
cause it would mean your son is still alive.” The patient cried quietly.
Ms. N was someone who wished to avoid uncontrolled sobbing and
overwhelming grief after the death of her son. The dream depicts a dis-
guised wish. The depiction of broken fingernails is a symbolic represen-
tation. Using synecdoche, the image substitutes a part for the whole. Bro-
ken fingernails have a specific meaning to Ms. N—her son is alive, she is
changing the sheets on his bed, and she is fulfilling the wish to have him
in her life once again so she can devote herself to him and escape her
grief. The dream also expresses a wish to redo the last few weeks of her
son’s life in a different way—that is, she would not concern herself with
trivial worries about such things as broken nails and would devote herself
to her son in a more emotionally complete way.
In these examples, the therapist has interpreted the manifest content
as representing a disguised version of the latent content. This work is only
the tip of the iceberg, however, because we rarely can plumb the depths of
a dream and look at the myriad determinants that have led to the creation
of the dream imagery. In Shakespeare’s A Midsummer Night’s Dream, after
Bottom wakes up from his extraordinary dream, he says, “It shall be called
‘Bottom’s Dream,’ because it hath no bottom” (Wright 1948, p. 56).
Dreams are bottomless, and we cannot expect to discern all of the mul-
tiple layers of meaning in any one dream. We generally have to content
ourselves with the most significant content for the patient at the time the
dream is dreamt.
Fantasy
The American writer Ursula K. Le Guin once made the following obser-
vation: “We like to think we live in daylight, but half the world is always
dark; and fantasy, like poetry, speaks the language of the night” (Le Guin
1979). The language of the night—dreams—is indeed closely linked to


--- PAGE 138 ---
Use of Dreams and Fantasies in Dynamic Psychotherapy
123
the language of daytime fantasy. Both transport us from reality into wish-
fulfilling nether regions of the psyche where life is the way we’d like it to
be. However, daydreams may be more embarrassing and more shameful
than night dreams. Many patients would much rather share a dream from
the previous night than a daydream they had only minutes before the ses-
sion began. Patients seem to feel more responsibility for daydreams and
therefore feel that their secret fears, wishes, deficiencies, and conflicts are
transparent when they share daydreams with their therapists.
Fantasy is one of our primary ways of adapting ourselves to the disap-
pointments of reality (Person 1995). Fantasies often provide substitute
gratifications for wishes in our lives that are painfully unfulfilled. They serve
as consolations for what we do not have, and they also may heal wounds
from our past.
A 16-year-old boy went through his adolescence narcissistically wounded.
In physical education class, he was always the last person chosen for teams
when competitive sports were played. He also felt uncoordinated and
weak in comparison to the other boys in his class. He feared that girls would
not be interested in him because of his poor athletic prowess. To compen-
sate for this painful and humiliating reality, he elaborated extensive fan-
tasies from reading Superman comic books. He imagined that he would
have all of Superman’s powers bestowed on him through magical contact
with some type of supernatural figure, such as a genie or fairy. In his fan-
tasy, he would appear at the Olympic trials and would set astounding
world records in multiple events, leading to his appearing on the cover of
Time magazine. He imagined the other boys in his physical education
class watching television in stunned silence as he received one gold medal
after another in Olympic competition.
Daydreams and reveries are often used synonymously with fantasy,
but they probably represent a subset of fantasy. Reveries and daydreams
are conscious. They often involve storylines and serve powerful psycho-
logical functions. As in the case of the teenage boy who lacked athletic
skills, his daydream helped him master the trauma of being the last one
chosen in every sports activity and extracted revenge as he contemplated
with glee how his peer group would react to seeing him in the Olympics
on television. Fantasies also supply a sense of fulfillment and gratification
in parts of our lives where we feel deprived of such pleasures. Even though
daydreams and reveries are private, they are often powerful forces that
influence our lives in ways that may be beyond our comprehension. They
can be part of a shared cultural fantasy or can be extremely idiosyncratic
and private (Person 1995).
Other fantasies, however, are unconscious and may emerge only through
psychotherapeutic work. At times these unconscious fantasies become


--- PAGE 139 ---
124
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
apparent in the transference relationship with the therapist, while at
other times they begin to emerge as patient and therapist piece together
the current themes in the patient’s life outside therapy.
Mr. O was a 52-year-old man whose wife had divorced him approxi-
mately 18 months before he came to therapy. He told his therapist that
he remained mired in grief. He was anxious, depressed, and virtually im-
mobilized. After he had talked about the grief in therapy for some time,
his therapist became aware that he was more or less “stuck” and was un-
able to move beyond the feeling of having been abandoned and wronged
by his ex-wife. He could not let go of any of the physical evidence of his
marriage around his home. Whereas she moved into an apartment, he
stayed in the house they had shared. He slept in the same bed, even though
one of the two nightstands was gone. He kept pictures and memorabilia
of her everywhere. One day his therapist suggested that perhaps he was
harboring a fantasy that she would actually return and live with him
again. Mr. O responded that he had had no contact with his ex-wife and
she had made no efforts to reconcile, but he still wondered if it might be
possible. With his therapist’s help, an unconscious fantasy started to sur-
face about a possible reconciliation. Part of the fantasy involved her taking
pity on him when she saw how much he was suffering and how immobi-
lized he was. If she felt sufficiently sorry for him, maybe she would return
to take care of him. He also imagined that the main reason she left him
was his lack of “earning power.” He began to think that if he could find a
way to win the state lottery, he might woo her back with a large check in
hand. Hence, beneath the paralysis was a powerful fantasy that was fuel-
ing his need to stay immobilized. If she could just see how much he suf-
fered, perhaps she would return. Meanwhile, maybe he could win the lot-
tery and woo her back with promises of wealth.
Mr. O had a fantasy that largely involved someone outside the therapy.
Some unconscious fantasies emerge only through careful understanding
of transference wishes that are not apparent at first. Some fantasies about
the therapist may be hidden for long periods of time for fear that if they
are discovered they will never be fulfilled. Sidney Smith (1977) described
the golden fantasy, a common if not universal fantasy that emerges in
many cases of psychoanalysis and long-term dynamic psychotherapy. In
brief, it is a “wish to have all of one’s needs met in a relationship hallowed
by perfection” (p. 311). This particular fantasy may appear as a powerful
resistance to psychotherapeutic work. Certain patients may relate to their
therapists as though the therapist can solve all their problems by loving
them and taking care of them. They may listen to insight with interest,
but they rarely internalize the insight and reflect on it in a way that trans-
lates into changes in their everyday lives. Alternatively, they may have no
interest in insight whatsoever and simply do whatever they can to ensure
that the therapist loves them.


--- PAGE 140 ---
Use of Dreams and Fantasies in Dynamic Psychotherapy
125
When this fantasy is uncovered and examined in the light of day, a ma-
jor feature of the fantasy is that somewhere in the world there is one spe-
cial person who is capable of fulfilling all the patient’s needs. The patient
assumes a position of passivity while being cared for in such a complete
way that no effort whatsoever is needed by the patient. Often patients
tenaciously hang onto this fantasy, feeling that to lose it would be to give
up their sense of meaning and to launch themselves into a horrible state
of existential despair. As the fantasy is explored, one often finds that the
patient believes that it represents a paradise lost from childhood. It is as
though perfect caretaking actually existed at one time (although it is
highly unlikely that it ever did), and if the patient simply behaves prop-
erly, the paradise will be restored. When the fantasy is identified and
elaborated, it often leads to a useful mourning process that is a regular
accompaniment of long-term dynamic psychotherapy. Many dreams, fan-
tasies, and wishes are reluctantly moderated in the course of treatment as
patients learn to live in reality more than in fantasy. Nevertheless, psycho-
therapy also teaches patients the value of fantasy and its adaptive and use-
ful aspects throughout the life cycle.
The Role of Erotic Fantasy
Many patients assume, when they are asked about fantasies, that the ther-
apist is referring to sexual fantasies. In popular usage, the term fantasy of-
ten has that connotation, and patients may feel particularly embarrassed
about any fantasies connected with the therapist. Sometimes an educa-
tional intervention is needed to clarify what is meant by fantasy when it
is used in psychotherapy.
Erotic fantasy plays a central role in the life of the human psyche. Stol-
ler (1979) emphasized that sexual fantasy is something we explore in
psychotherapy because the themes in erotic fantasy transcend issues of
sexuality. Erotic fantasy is often a window into the internal object rela-
tions, unconscious conflicts, narcissistic wounds, and traumas of a per-
son’s past. As Stoller (1979) put it, “The function of daydreams is to state
a problem that has been disguised and then to solve it, the problem and
solution being the poles between which excitement flows” (p. xi).
Like many other daydreams, erotic fantasies, especially those that ac-
company masturbation or sexual relations with others, are often shame-
ful and embarrassing. While erotic fantasies vary widely, each adult has a
specific erotic pattern that Person (1980) refers to as the sex print.
Sex prints may fit the person’s personality style or may be surprisingly
at odds with the person’s usual behavior and interpersonal style. Fantasies
may be heterosexual, bisexual, or homosexual and may involve particular


--- PAGE 141 ---
126
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
places or multiple partners. Some of the excitement in sexual fantasies
may be shameful to the person, and often what he or she is imagining dur-
ing sex with a beloved partner is a source of deep shame because it is so
different from what is actually occurring in the bed. The sex print that
each adult harbors generally has its origin in themes of power and plea-
sure that relate to early life experiences and conflicts involving gender
and pleasure (Person 1995). The fantasy might be necessary for the per-
son to reach orgasm, or it might be at least ancillary to other sexual ac-
tivities.
Erotic fantasies may be viewed as unacceptable or “politically incorrect.”
Therefore patients may hope to conceal them throughout the psycho-
therapy so they will be spared the humiliation of exposing their secret
wishes. For example, in a study of 193 university students, 30% of women
and 31% of men acknowledged that they had sexual fantasies of “being
tied up or bound during sex activities” (Person et al. 1989). Patients are
often highly unforgiving about such fantasies, and therapists must handle
their fears with considerable tact. Some patients may go through an en-
tire psychotherapy process without ever discussing their sexual lives or
fantasies because of the shame. Therapists can work with their anxieties
about revealing such matters, but some patients may be quite reluctant
and might never discuss their sex lives with the therapist for fear that
they will be humiliated for sharing their most private and shameful fan-
tasies.
Many other patients readily speak about their erotic fantasy lives and
hope to learn something more about themselves from exploring these
fantasies. Frequently the erotic fantasy life provides hope and compensa-
tion for the despair existing in the person’s actual intimate relationship.
Sexualization may transform feelings of destructiveness, neediness, and
dysphoria into excitement and euphoria (Coen 1992; Gabbard 1996).
Ms. P was a 42-year-old woman who came from an extremely religious
family of origin and had always been perfectly behaved throughout her
childhood, adolescence, and young adulthood. However, she came to
therapy explaining that her husband had had no interest in her sexually
for 10 years, and she had reached a point of despair. She had had breast
augmentation surgery and had gotten a personal trainer to tone up her
body. All of this was to no avail, as her husband continued to pay little
attention to her. In the course of the work with the personal trainer, how-
ever, she began to become infatuated with him and had extensive sexual
fantasies about him. She particularly loved the idea that he was a “bad boy
type.” She imagined that she could be “dirty” with him and do things that
her husband would never do. She bought a black “Hummer” and gradu-
ally developed a new identity associated with the car and with her fantasy
love life involving the personal trainer. She explained to the therapist that


--- PAGE 142 ---
Use of Dreams and Fantasies in Dynamic Psychotherapy
127
she bought the Hummer because it was “cocky and bad-ass.” She also said
that when she drove around town in it she had an illusion of power and
invulnerability. She mentioned in passing that Hummers had become
popular in the early 1990s after the Gulf War. When she drove around
her hometown in her Hummer, she had explicit sexual fantasies about
running into her trainer and having a sexual liaison in the back seat of the
vehicle.
The fantasy life of Ms. P served multiple functions. It clearly compen-
sated her for her experience at home of not being desired. It also pro-
vided hope that she would somehow find a man who would find her ex-
citing. By choosing a “bad boy” and a Hummer to drive, she also undid the
rigid constrictions of her extremely religious family life and fulfilled her
dream to be wild and adventurous, unrestrained by family obligations or
religious beliefs.
Therapeutic Approaches to Fantasy
Because fantasy is ubiquitous, the therapist will be immersed in the pa-
tient’s conscious and unconscious fantasies throughout the therapy. Nar-
ratives about the past will help the therapist learn what the patient is
trying to overcome with current fantasies about others. Expectations of
romantic partners, colleagues, children, and bosses provide a rich source of
the patient’s crucial fantasies as they operate in the present day. Similarly,
when therapists discuss expectations of therapy with the patient, a vari-
ety of transference fantasies emerge about what therapists can or should
do.
Fantasies are closely linked to what Luborsky (1984) referred to as the
core conflictual relationship theme. The theme usually involves some type
of need or wish that is in conflict with a control function of the ego or
superego. For example, the patient may wish to succeed in a job situation
but might worry that ambitious strivings will be punished. To resolve the
conflict, the patient decides not to even try to succeed at work. Thus, one
way to discern fantasy is to identify a wish, a fantasized response from an-
other person to that wish, and a subsequent response from the self (Book
1998).
Exploring expectations and disappointments in others generally pro-
vides a direct path to discovering details of a patient’s fantasy life. Some pa-
tients may balk at the term fantasy because of their association of the term
with sex or because of the shameful nature of their daydreams. Therapists
must use tact in exploring private fantasies. If the patient is reluctant to talk
about secret fantasies, the therapist may choose simply to accept that de-
cision and wait for a subsequent time when the alliance is stronger.


--- PAGE 143 ---
128
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Another option is to approach the reluctance to talk about fantasies
like any other resistance, such as silence or avoidance. A dynamic thera-
pist does not go directly after the underlying content or the “secret.” Dy-
namic therapists assume that resistance is there for good reason, so they
explore the patient’s anxieties about revealing something to the therapist
rather than verbally twisting the patient’s arm to reveal the secret. Often
when therapists explain to the patient in these circumstances that ther-
apy is not coercive and the patient has every right to conceal material
from the therapist, such statements have a paradoxical effect. Some pa-
tients will feel more comfortable in sharing because they sense that the
therapist is not unduly voyeuristic or nosy about the patient’s secrets.
Moreover, when therapists explore the patient’s anxieties about revealing
shameful material, they often come across transference fantasies about
the therapist’s probable reaction that are extremely useful in understand-
ing the patient’s fears and wishes.
Some patients are reluctant to express sexual fantasies because they
are convinced that the therapist will disapprove of them or think them
perverse. Hence when patients are discussing erotic or otherwise shame-
ful fantasies, therapists who maintain a matter-of-fact attitude may help
patients overcome the certainty that the therapist is thinking humiliating
thoughts about them. It is frequently helpful to point out to patients that
they themselves are the ones who find the fantasies disgusting and that
they assume (through projection) that others share their views.
At times certain fantasies take on life-or-death importance and need to
be pursued more aggressively. Patients who are determined to commit
suicide, for example, may harbor powerful fantasies about the impact
their suicide will have on others. Parents of small children may assume
their children will be better off if they commit suicide, and exploration
of that fantasy with such patients may help them increase their mental-
izing capacities and recognize that the children will not feel exactly the
way the patient imagines they will. Some patients feel that if they cannot
measure up to their excessively perfectionist self-expectations, suicide is
the only viable option (Smith and Eyman 1988). Examining these unre-
alistic fantasies of what is possible in their own lives may help them reach
a more moderated view of what to expect from themselves. Revenge fan-
tasies are often present in persons who are planning suicide, and there
may be an intensely hateful wish to destroy the lives of others through
the act of suicide. Finally, reunion fantasies may be present in the motiva-
tion for suicide, and patients who look forward to a joyous reunion with
a loved one may find suicide highly enticing (Gabbard 2000).
Too often discussions of suicide are fraught with anxiety, especially by
beginning therapists. A frank discussion with the patient about what will


--- PAGE 144 ---
Use of Dreams and Fantasies in Dynamic Psychotherapy
129
happen after suicide may lead to critically important dynamic themes that
can be discussed and understood. The more these fantasies are laid bare,
the more viable alternatives may be seen to be realistic, and the patient
may learn that there is a way to continue living with pain instead of end-
ing it all with suicide.
Summary
Dreams reveal unconscious struggles that the patient may have difficulty
verbalizing during waking life. The latent content of a dream may be dis-
guised using condensation, displacement, symbolic representation, and sec-
ondary revision. In working with dreams, the therapist must elicit the pa-
tient’s associations to the dream and recognize that dreams may also serve
resistance functions.
Fantasy is ubiquitous. Some fantasies help us survive disappointments
and traumas. Reveries and daydreams are conscious, but other fantasies
are largely unconscious and require therapeutic work to bring them to
the surface. Erotic fantasies may be windows into conflicts, defenses, and
internal object relations. Powerful fantasies may also be the source of sui-
cidal wishes.
References
Book HE: How to Practice Brief Psychodynamic Psychotherapy: The Core Con-
flictual Relationship Theme Method. Washington, DC, American Psycho-
logical Association, 1998
Coen SJ: The Misuse of Persons: Analyzing Pathological Dependency. Hillsdale,
NJ, Analytic Press, 1992
Freud S: The interpretation of dreams, Parts 1 and 2 (1900), in The Standard Edi-
tion of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud, Vols 4 and 5.
Translated and edited by Strachey J. London, Hogarth Press, 1953, pp 1–625
Gabbard GO: Love and Hate in the Analytic Setting. Northvale, NJ, Jason Aron-
son, 1996
Gabbard GO: Psychodynamic Psychiatry in Clinical Practice, 3rd Edition. Wash-
ington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 2000
Hobson JA: The Dreaming Brain. New York, Basic Books, 1988
Le Guin UK: The Language of the Night: Essays on Fantasy and Science Fiction.
New York, Putnam, 1979
Luborsky L: Principles of Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy: A Manual for Supportive-
Expressive Treatment. New York, Basic Books, 1984
Person ES: Sexuality as a mainstay of identity, in Women—Sex and Sexuality.
Edited by Stimpson CR, Person ES. Chicago, IL, University of Chicago Press,
1980, pp 36–61


--- PAGE 145 ---
130
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Person ES: By Force of Fantasy: How We Make Our Lives. New York, Basic
Books, 1995
Person ES, Terestman N, Myers WA, et al: Gender differences in sexual behaviors
and fantasies in a college population. J Sex Marital Ther 15:187–198, 1989
Reiser MF: The dream in contemporary psychiatry. Am J Psychiatry 158:351–
359, 2001
Smith K, Eyman J: Ego structure and object differentiation in suicidal patients, in
Primitive Mental States of the Rorschach. Edited by Lerner HD, Lerner PM.
Madison, CT, International Universities Press, 1988, pp 176–202
Smith S: The golden fantasy: a regressive reaction to separation anxiety. Int J Psy-
choanal 58:311–324, 1977
Stoller R: Sexual Excitement: Dynamics of Erotic Life. New York, Pantheon,
1979
Wright LB (ed): Four Comedies by William Shakespeare. New York, Simon &
Schuster, 1948


--- PAGE 146 ---
131
8
Identifying and Working 
With Countertransference
Dr. Q, a 29-year-old female psychiatric resident, brought her new patient,
Mrs. R, into her office for their first session. Mrs. R was an attractive 54-
year-old woman who appeared younger than her age and spoke in a fairly
dramatic style. Her speech was rapid, and her thought processes tended
to be somewhat circumstantial, so she rambled in a discursive way as she
told Dr. Q about her history. She had multiple complaints about both her
feelings and her situation. She said her husband did not work enough, her
two grown daughters were ungrateful, and she had chronic financial
problems. She said she had attended an anger management clinic, where
she had pounded on a chair while expressing her anger toward her
mother. She asked Dr. Q if there was anything she could do to “get to the
bottom of my anger,” and before Dr. Q could answer she said, “I doubt if
you can help—even God doesn’t love me.”
Dr. Q’s initial reaction to Mrs. R was to feel smothered and over-
whelmed. She found it difficult to keep up with Mrs. R and to follow her
train of thought. Dr. Q also found that it was extremely difficult to inter-
rupt her or to get a word in edgewise. Near the end of the first interview,
Dr. Q found herself wondering where to begin. She frankly doubted that
she would be able to help Mrs. R.
As the weekly sessions continued, Mrs. R complained extensively
about her husband. She said that he had had a recent angioplasty, but it
was “no big deal,” and she said that he only had himself to blame, since he
never exercised and had terrible eating habits. She would talk a lot about
how unresponsive her mother was to her, and she noted that her two
daughters also seemed uninterested in her or her suffering. Mrs. R tended
to speak as though Dr. Q already knew the details of her life. She fre-


--- PAGE 147 ---
132
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
quently mentioned names without giving any explanation whatsoever.
Dr. Q began to feel as though she was only a sounding board to Mrs. R.
She found it difficult to interrupt so she could ask for clarifications about
the names that Mrs. R mentioned. These efforts to get further informa-
tion were rarely successful, because Mrs. R rambled on as if she didn’t re-
ally care whether or not Dr. Q knew who she was talking about. Dr. Q
began to feel used. She felt that Mrs. R did not truly want psychotherapy
but simply wanted someone to accept her point of view uncritically and
provide sympathy for all of the mistreatment she experienced at the
hands of her family members and others. Dr. Q began to dread each ses-
sion with Mrs. R and found that her mind frequently wandered onto what
she would fix for dinner that evening, a problem with her babysitter, and
a research project she was developing. When her mind wandered back to
Mrs. R, Dr. Q had a fleeting thought that the way Mrs. R was talking re-
minded her of how her mother had talked to her on the telephone the
previous evening. Dr. Q found that thought highly disconcerting and
quickly shifted her attention back to the content of Mrs. R’s narrative.
Dr. Q’s struggles with her emotional reactions to her patient are familiar
to all of us. As noted in Chapter 1 (“Key Concepts”), one of the central no-
tions of psychodynamic therapy is that there are two subjectivities—some
would say “two patients”—in the consulting room. The two complex hu-
man beings who are interacting in the course of psychotherapy are mu-
tually influencing one another all the time and are evoking a variety of feel-
ings toward one another.
Countertransference is thus ubiquitous. In the same way that Kohut’s
self psychology universalized narcissism, the theoretical shift within psy-
choanalysis from a one-person to a two-person psychology has legiti-
mized countertransference as a useful part of the therapist’s daily work.
The original Freudian version of countertransference, the so-called narrow
view, has a slightly pejorative connotation—that is, the therapist has
countertransference because of unresolved personal conflicts. This pejo-
rative tone is now considered a relic of the past. As noted in Chapter 1,
the narrow Freudian view is only part of the picture. The prevailing view
that crosses most theoretical schools is that countertransference feelings
involve a joint creation with contributions from both patient and therapist
(Gabbard 1995). In other words, the therapist brings her own past into
the dyad, but the patient also induces feelings in the therapist.
If we apply these conceptual ideas to the case of Dr. Q and Mrs. R, we
can see that Mrs. R relates to Dr. Q in a particular way. She controls the
session by not allowing Dr. Q to speak, rambles discursively about how
others have failed her, and places pressure on Dr. Q to accept her point
of view uncritically. Dr. Q begins to feel overwhelmed, useless, and frus-
trated because she finds herself virtually unable to make a useful com-
ment that might allow her to be a participant in a two-way conversation.


--- PAGE 148 ---
Identifying and Working With Countertransference
133
Like many patients who are narcissistically organized, Mrs. R has a sender
but no receiver (Gabbard 2000). This treatment of another person as a
sounding board induces what Kernberg (1970) referred to as a “satellite
existence.” Dr. Q’s response of losing interest and dreading the sessions is
completely understandable. Moreover, Dr. Q’s countertransference sug-
gests that the internal world of Mrs. R has been recreated in the interper-
sonal field between Mrs. R and Dr. Q. Mrs. R describes having a mother
who is uninterested in her and two daughters who seem to lack interest in
her. These internal objects are represented within her and, through projec-
tive identification, are externalized in the process of the psychotherapy.
Dr. Q identifies with that projected uninterested object and begins to feel
and behave like the representation in Mrs. R’s mind. However, Dr. Q also
brings her own past to the table, manifested by a fleeting thought regarding
the similarity between the telephone conversation with her mother and
the situation in therapy. Dr. Q recognizes that Mrs. R is about the age of
her mother and that the two have certain characteristics in common. Dr. Q
may feel like tuning out Mrs. R in the same way she feels like tuning out
her mother at times. This fleeting thought of Dr. Q’s suggests that there
are self and object representations within her that serve as convenient
“hooks” for what is projected by Mrs. R. Through careful processing of
what she is feeling, Dr. Q can start to appreciate that she is experiencing
what others, such as Mrs. R’s daughters, experience when they are talking
with Mrs. R.
Projective Identification and 
Countertransference Enactment
Two terms, projective identification and countertransference enactment, have
worked their way into everyday discourse among psychoanalysts and psy-
chodynamic therapists. Both involve similar processes in the therapeutic
dyad, but the former is derived from Kleinian and object relations thinking,
while the latter developed out of the work of American ego psychologists.
The concept of projective identification has evolved over time through
the contributions of many British and American contributors (Bion 1962a,
1962b; Gabbard 1995; Klein 1946/1975; Ogden 1979, 1982, 1992; Rosen-
feld 1952; Scharff 1992). The definition that has become most popular,
although by no means universal, is one that involves two steps: 1) a self or
object representation (often accompanied by an affect state) is projectively
disavowed by unconsciously placing it into someone else, and 2) the pro-
jector exerts interpersonal pressure that nudges the other person to ex-
perience or unconsciously identify with that which has been projected


--- PAGE 149 ---
134
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
(Figures 8–1 and 8–2). The first step is a type of transference, whereas
the second step can be regarded as countertransference.
If the situation is in a psychotherapeutic context, then a third step occurs.
The recipient of the projection, the therapist, contains and tolerates the
problematic self or object representation along with its affect and processes
the projected contents, allowing them to be taken back (in a somewhat
altered form) or reintrojected by the patient who projected them (see Fig-
ure 8–3). In this manner the construct of projective identification can be
viewed as both an intrapsychic defense and an interpersonal communica-
tion. It can even be regarded as having therapeutic implications, in that the
patient sees the therapist can tolerate difficult internal states that seemed
unbearable to the patient. When the patient takes back the projected con-
tents, the self or object representation, along with the affect accompany-
ing it, is modified to some extent so that over time there is an alteration
in the patient’s internal object relationships.
In light of the broad consensus that projective identification relies on
interpersonal pressure or “nudging,” rather than a mystical or supernatu-
ral exchange of psychic content, the countertransference response arising
in the therapist must be viewed as having been a latent structure that was
somehow triggered by the patient’s nudging. The preexisting nature of
the therapist’s conflicts and defenses and internal object relations will de-
termine whether or not a projection and its recipient are a good fit. Even
when countertransference is experienced by therapists as an alien force
sweeping over them, what is actually happening is that an affect-laden re-
Figure 8–1.
Projective identification—step 1.
The patient disavows and projects a bad internal object onto the treater.
Source.
Reprinted from Gabbard GO: Psychodynamic Psychiatry in Clinical Practice, 3rd
Edition. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 2000. Used with permission.
Patient
good self
good object
bad object
Treater
bad self


--- PAGE 150 ---
Identifying and Working With Countertransference
135
pressed self or object representation has been activated by the interper-
sonal pressure of the patient. Hence a therapist’s usual sense of a familiar,
continuous self has been disrupted by the emergence of these repressed
aspects of the self. Symington (1990) described this process as being one
in which the patient “bullies” the therapist into thinking the patient’s
thoughts rather than the therapist’s own thoughts.
Figure 8–2.
Projective identification—step 2.
The treater unconsciously begins to feel and/or behave like the projected bad object in re-
sponse to interpersonal pressure exerted by the patient (projective counteridentification).
Source.
Reprinted from Gabbard GO: Psychodynamic Psychiatry in Clinical Practice, 3rd
Edition. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 2000. Used with permission.
Figure 8–3.
Projective identification—step 3.
The treater contains and modifies the projected bad object, which is then reintrojected by
the patient and assimilated (introjective identification).
Source.
Reprinted from Gabbard GO: Psychodynamic Psychiatry in Clinical Practice, 3rd
Edition. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 2000. Used with permission.
Patient
good self
good object
Treater
bad self
bad object
Patient
good self
good object
Treater
modified
bad self
modified
bad object
