

--- PAGE 101 ---
86
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
A patient may begin therapy with a conviction that the therapist, a
much older man, is bored and uninterested in what the patient has to say.
In time the patient might recognize that he is assuming that his therapist
has these qualities because his father—the template for all authority fig-
ures—always acted bored and disinterested when he tried to engage him
in conversation. This is an associational network that is powerfully active
in the patient’s everyday life. Over time the therapist’s steadfast interest,
concern, and persistence in wanting to help the patient lead to a relative
deactivation of the old network while strengthening the new network in
which older male authority figures are regarded as interested in the pa-
tient.
For many years, psychoanalysts and psychoanalytic therapists assumed
that the most significant interventions were those that target the “deep-
est” processes, meaning the most deeply unconscious (Wachtel 1997). To
some degree this line of reasoning makes sense, because clinical experi-
ence often suggests that focusing only on conscious thoughts or feelings
produces rather short-lived changes. Implicit processes are psychologi-
cally and neurologically distinct from explicit ones, and targeting only
conscious processes is likely to leave many significant associational net-
works untouched.
Nevertheless, conscious thought processes may be a source of consid-
erable torment. One patient, for example, was consumed with thoughts
about a man she hoped would propose to her and who instead spurned her.
She spent most of her waking (conscious) moments for the following year
ruminating about what she might have said, what he meant when he said
particular things, and so forth. Over time the patient came to understand
her tendency to ruminate as a defensive strategy that had once allowed
her to cope with the uncertainty of having an intermittently abusive par-
ent. This insight-oriented work was aimed at examining the unconscious
function of rumination for her, which was tied to its etiology. At the same
time, however, the therapist helped her to distinguish modes of conscious
self-reflection: introspection, which is aimed at examining experiences in the
past or present with an attitude of curiosity and self-exploration and with
the possibility for change in the future, and rumination, which draws on
the past with an attitude of regret. The former is ultimately likely to lead
to a sense of freedom from prior emotional constraints, whereas the latter
is likely to further ensnare the patient in these constraints and perpetuate
her anxiety and depression. In fact, with the patient mentioned above, this
distinction proved very helpful in regulating spirals of negative affect. When
she began to catch herself ruminating, she would shift gears by asking her-
self questions about the functions rumination was serving at those very
moments. For example, she would say to herself, “What am I getting out


--- PAGE 102 ---
Goals and Therapeutic Action
87
of this right now?” or “What would I be feeling if I weren’t ruminating?”
Indeed, exploration of this conscious dynamic led to a better understand-
ing of why she was initially using the treatment process in the service of ru-
mination (and self-flagellation) rather than change.
Conscious thoughts can amplify feelings, which can in turn lead peo-
ple either to undertake or to avoid actions that profoundly affect their
lives, particularly in self-defeating patients whose conscious attitudes to-
ward themselves, like their unconscious attitudes, contribute to their fail-
ure to attain or maintain jobs, relationships, and other gratifications. Most
dynamic therapists routinely call depressed patients’ attention to the way
they consciously berate themselves, expect the worst, and discount their
own abilities. Although doing so is unlikely by itself to change uncon-
scious networks, it may well help stop self-defeating spirals and allow pa-
tients to make better life decisions, which in turn can affect their future
happiness.
Another target of therapeutic action involves conscious affect states.
Focusing on conscious feelings may involve efforts to alter the frequency
or intensity of particular emotional states, helping the patient recognize
and tolerate contradictory feelings (e.g., love and hate toward the same
person). The therapist may also help a patient tolerate feelings that are
uncomfortable instead of taking self-destructive actions to deal with
them. Patients often come in with the explicit goal of reducing adverse
emotional states like anxiety and depression. At other times, however,
the therapist may seek to help a patient increase awareness of particular
emotions. One finding of the Menninger Psychotherapy Research Project
was that patients who had good outcomes often reported an increase in
anxiety. They had learned to tolerate anxiety enough so that it could be
used as a signal of something being amiss intrapsychically (Siegel and
Rosen 1962).
Still a third conscious strategy may be to examine the patient’s coping
styles. Patients may be helped to use humor to cope with unpleasant re-
alities and self-criticism. Patients with severe personality disorders who
lack basic affect regulation skills may be taught conscious coping strate-
gies as a way of containing the affect.
The major point here for any area of therapeutic action is that both
conscious and unconscious associational networks need to be altered as
part of the therapeutic process (see Table 5–2 for a summary of the tar-
gets of therapeutic action).
Now we will turn to look at some of the specific therapeutic tech-
niques that foster therapeutic change.


--- PAGE 103 ---
88
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Technical Strategies for Fostering 
Therapeutic Change
The methods of fostering change are many and varied, but most fall into
three classes of intervention: those aimed at fostering insight, those that
derive from aspects of the therapeutic relationship, and “secondary strat-
egies” such as self-disclosure, exposure, and affirmation.
Fostering Insight 
In traditional psychoanalytic practice, two major techniques are advo-
cated: free association and interpretation. Both of these have some appli-
cation to psychodynamic therapy. Free association provides a way of seeing
defenses in action and occasionally gaining a glimpse behind the defenses.
Because defenses emerge as resistances in the psychotherapeutic setting,
the therapist gains a good deal of information about what particular top-
ics lead to a shutting down of the process or a changing of the subject.
For example, a patient may be talking freely about his work situation un-
til he mentions his female boss. He then abruptly changes the subject to
what he did the previous evening. The therapist sees the defensive flight
away from an important figure in his life, leading to an inference that the
female boss creates anxiety in the patient. Free association also allows the
patient and therapist to map the patient’s implicit networks of associa-
tions, much as cartographers of the mind would create a model of the
networks that lead the patient to think, feel, and act in specific ways. A
woman patient was speaking about a date she had with her new boy-
friend, in which she became quite humiliated. In the middle of a descrip-
tion of the event, she said an image of her father suddenly flashed into
her mind. The therapist recognized that something about the humiliating
Table 5–2.
Targets of therapeutic action
Unconscious
Conscious
Altering associational networks that 
trigger problematic defensive 
strategies
Altering associational networks that 
trigger problematic interpersonal 
patterns
Distinguishing between modes of 
conscious self-reflection
Addressing conscious attitudes toward 
oneself
Altering the frequency or intensity of 
conscious emotional states
Altering associational networks that 
underlie problematic emotional 
reactions
Helping the patient tolerate feelings or 
become more aware of them
Examining the patient’s conscious 
coping style


--- PAGE 104 ---
Goals and Therapeutic Action
89
experience with the boyfriend was associationally connected to experi-
ences with her father and pointed that out.
Interpretation, as described in Chapter 4 (“Therapeutic Interventions”),
may be directed at a wide array of mental events that are interconnected:
fears, fantasies, wishes, expectations, defenses, conflicts, transferences,
and relational patterns that are observed from the patient’s narrative de-
scriptions of outside events. One may also interpret the patient’s avoid-
ance of certain thoughts and feelings, as well as linkages between thoughts
and feelings or between elements of associational networks that the pa-
tient has not recognized. Transference interpretations classically connect
the relationship to the therapist with past relationships and extratransfer-
ence relationships. Although transference interpretation is a central fea-
ture of psychoanalysis, it varies considerably in psychodynamic therapy,
depending on the patient’s capacity to work in the transference and the
degree of supportiveness needed to make the therapy viable.
In addition to free association and interpretation, observation from an
outside perspective also fosters insight. As described in Chapter 4 (“Thera-
peutic Interventions”), observation stops short of explaining but may
nevertheless lead to understanding. One of the main reasons that dy-
namic psychotherapy is helpful is that the therapist has an outside perspec-
tive on the patient. In brief, patients cannot know how they come across
to others because they are inside themselves. Therapists have the perspec-
tive of an object and therefore can comment on the patient from an exter-
nal frame of reference. A good analogy here is the common experience of
seeing oneself on videotape. Typically, one’s reaction is, “Do I really look
like that? Do I really sound like that?” We don’t have a good idea of how
we come across to others, and the therapist can make helpful observations
based on the fact that the therapist’s perspective is different from the pa-
tient’s (Gabbard 1997).
As noted in Chapter 1 (“Key Concepts”), the “how-to” of relatedness is
embedded in implicit procedural memory. Therapists have the opportu-
nity to observe these automatic and unconscious patterns in action. A ther-
apist might say, “You looked so sad when you spoke of your ex-husband,”
or “I notice that you disagree with almost everything I say about your
mother, and you often wince while I’m talking about her.” In this way, the
therapist makes unconscious automatic defensive reactions and internal
object relations more available to the patient’s conscious awareness. These
interventions do not explain the meaning of the observations, only the
fact of their existence. Fonagy (1999) emphasized that a crucial avenue
for therapeutic change may lie in the patient’s increasing capacity to “find
himself” in the therapist’s mind (p. 51). By commenting on feelings and
nonverbal communications that are seen only by the therapist, the patient


--- PAGE 105 ---
90
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
may begin to assemble a portrait of himself or herself based on the thera-
pist’s observations. Implicit patterns thus become more available for con-
scious reflection.
Aspects of Therapeutic Action Deriving From the 
Therapist-Patient Relationship
The therapeutic relationship serves as a vehicle for change in a variety of
ways. First, central to contemporary relational views is the notion that
experiencing a different kind of relationship can be an important source
of therapeutic action. Adding a neuroscience perspective, we might say
that the experience of a new relationship alters networks of association,
including the fears, wishes, motives, and defensive strategies that are as-
sociatively linked to representations of objects or affect states.
Therapeutic change does not occur by merely playing a role. If a ther-
apist simply behaves differently from objects in the patient’s internal
world, durable change is unlikely. What appears to be crucial is that the
therapist not only is different from an object in the patient’s past but in
some respects is similar to it. Features of the therapist or the therapeutic
situation must bear enough resemblance to prototypes from the past to
activate the core networks that require reworking. At times the patient’s
activated networks will, in turn, pull the therapist into patterns of behav-
ing that resemble objects from the patient’s past. It may be crucial for the
patient and therapist to understand and transform these patterns. In writ-
ing about psychoanalysis, Greenberg (1986) astutely observed, “If the an-
alyst cannot be experienced as a new object, analysis never gets under-
way; if he cannot be experienced as an old one, it never ends” (p. 98).
Hence the therapist must hover in an intermediate zone between being
an old object and being a new object to interrupt the patient’s complex
“script” and reflect on what is transpiring.
A second way the relationship contributes to change is through inter-
nalization of the therapist’s functions. For example, a soothing experience
of the therapist’s care and concern may contribute to a patient’s learning
to self-soothe (Adler and Buie 1979). At times this may begin through
forming a representation of the therapist that the patient uses consciously
when upset. Over time the representation may be activated automati-
cally and unconsciously. In this context it is important to emphasize that
internalizing this function does not require the use of a conscious declar-
ative representation. The therapeutic relationship itself is accompanied
by unconscious affective connections that have been referred to by Lyons-
Ruth and her colleagues (1998) as “implicit relational knowing.” This phe-
nomenon refers to moments of meeting between therapist and patient


--- PAGE 106 ---
Goals and Therapeutic Action
91
that are not symbolically represented or dynamically unconscious in the
ordinary sense. This notion is based on the mutual regulatory moves in
the infant-caregiver relationship as described by Tronick (1989). In other
words, some change that occurs in dynamic therapy is in the realm of pro-
cedural knowledge involving how to act, feel, and think in a particular re-
lational context (Stern et al. 1998). Implied in this conceptualization is
the important point that many changes that occur are outside planned tech-
nical strategies. A teary eye, a shared laugh, or a meaningful glance at the
end of a session may promote change, even though the exchange is en-
tirely spontaneous and is not within the therapist’s conceptualization of
“technique.” Through interactions with the therapist, prototypes of object
relationships stored in implicit procedural memory can be modified by
new experiences. Psychotherapy can thus be viewed as a new attachment
relationship that has the potential to restructure attachment-related im-
plicit procedural memory (Amini et al. 1996).
A third way the relationship can be therapeutic is through internaliza-
tion of emotional attitudes of the therapist. For some patients, this in-
volves a tempering of a hypercritical superego. The patient begins to inter-
nalize the therapist’s nonjudgmental, curious, exploratory stance toward
material that the patient has regarded as shameful or as “bad.” This inter-
nalization process may occur through explicit comments by the thera-
pist, but gestures, intonation, and other forms of nonverbal communica-
tion may also be registered implicitly or explicitly.
Patients may also internalize conscious strategies for self-reflection. In
this manner, patients become their own therapists who can think about
their internal experience in the way the therapist does. One frequently
observes this strategy during a vacation, when the patient begins to imag-
ine a dialogue with the therapist while the therapist is out of town and
identifies with the analyzing function of the therapist. Another variation
on this theme referred to earlier (see “Fostering Insight”) is the patient’s
capacity to find himself or herself in the therapist’s mind (Fonagy 1999).
A final mode of therapeutic action related to the relationship is the
simple identification of recurrent transference-countertransference themes.
Repetitive interactions eventually become obvious to the patient, even
without the therapist’s interpretation. The therapist may simply call at-
tention to them or observe them without understanding or explicating
their underlying motivation.
Secondary Strategies
In the category of secondary strategies are included a number of interven-
tions that are classically regarded as not truly psychoanalytic. All psycho-


--- PAGE 107 ---
92
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
analytic therapists, however, use a variety of interventions to bring about
change every time they see a patient (see Table 5–3). Helping the patient
change is far more important than being true to a theory.
The first class of secondary strategies is the implicit or explicit use of
suggestion, often in a variation on confrontation. Freud wanted to distin-
guish interpretation from suggestion as a way of distancing himself from
hypnosis. Yet most current thinkers view suggestion as an integral part of
the therapist’s authority that one should not disavow (Levy and Inder-
bitzin 1997). For example, even interpretations may call the patient’s at-
tention to behavior patterns with an implicit or explicit suggestion that
the patterns are problematic and may require change (Raphling 1995).
Directing the patient’s attention to one set of associations or linkages
may, by implication, suggest to the patient that certain aspects of mental
life or behavior are worth more attention than others.
Another secondary strategy that may lead to change is the confronta-
tion of dysfunctional beliefs. Cognitive therapists regularly use this type of
intervention, but most dynamic therapists also use it, either implicitly or
explicitly. The examination and confrontation of irrational or dysfunc-
tional beliefs is an inevitable component of any good psychotherapy for
depression or anxiety. Regardless of the theoretical underpinnings of the
treatment, therapists must help patients see that anxious and depressed
mood states recruit ways of thinking that perpetuate dysphoria and
therefore need to be directly addressed.
A third class of secondary strategies involves efforts to address the pa-
tient’s conscious decision-making or problem-solving methods. Although psy-
chodynamic therapy is often referred to as “nondirective,” this adjective is a
generalization that has many, many exceptions. Dynamic therapists fre-
quently direct the patient’s attention to problematic ways of thinking or be-
having. Even patients who are high functioning and suited for exploratory
therapy can benefit from an explicit focus on problem solving. Such ap-
proaches may help a person make more adaptive life choices, which in turn
influence her subsequent decisions. For example, one patient who worked
in an academic setting was enraged at her department chair, for reasons that
involved both real perceptions and transference distortions (Gabbard and
Westen 2003). She was planning to go to his office shortly after a psycho-
therapy session to confront him in ways that would have been disastrous for
her career. The therapist interrupted her plan with two approaches: by con-
fronting the self-destructive way she was planning to deal with her anger and
by exploring other ways that she could address her concerns with her de-
partment chair that would accomplish her conscious goals without under-
mining herself. The patient then went on to interact with her chair in a way
that addressed her needs while also avoiding shooting herself in the foot.


--- PAGE 108 ---
Goals and Therapeutic Action
93
Table 5–3.
Modes of therapeutic action in long-term dynamic psychotherapy
Techniques aimed at 
fostering insight
Aspects of therapeutic action derived 
from the therapeutic relationship
Secondary strategies
Free association
Experiencing a different kind of relationship
Implicit or explicit use of suggestion
Interpretation
Internalization of the therapist’s function
Confrontation of dysfunctional beliefs
Observation from an outside 
perspective
Internalization of therapist’s emotional 
attitudes
Addressing the patient’s conscious problem-
solving methods
Internalization of conscious strategies for self-reflection
Exposure
Identification of recurrent transference-
countertransference themes
Forms of self-disclosure
Affirmation
Facilitative techniques


--- PAGE 109 ---
94
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
As this example suggests, helping patients solve problems may be par-
ticularly useful in the presence of strong affects, since their reasoning can
be compromised under such circumstances.
Exposure is a primary mode of therapeutic action in behavioral treat-
ments, particularly for anxiety states. However, variations on exposure oc-
cur even in dynamic therapy. Fundamentally, exposure refers to present-
ing the patient with a stimulus or situation that provokes anxiety while
forcing the patient to confront the situation until the anxiety dissipates.
This approach alters associative links. In the treatment of panic disorder,
cognitive-behavioral researchers have had considerable success in address-
ing the fear of fear that panic patients develop. The hypervigilance of such
patients amplifies the anxiety and may lead to further panic attacks (Bar-
low 2002). Experimental evidence suggests that the association between in-
ternal states (such as shortness of breath) and anxiety about potential panic
can over time become wired at subcortical levels involving the thalamus
and amygdala. These associative links may not be easily amenable to verbal
or cerebral treatments such as psychodynamic therapy, except to the ex-
tent that the patient’s insights into the problems force confrontation of
the feared situations. Analysts from Freud on have noted that for phobic
patients little progress will be made unless the patient faces the feared sit-
uation (Gabbard and Bartlett 1998).
Patients undergoing psychodynamic treatments manifest avoidance in
many areas of their lives, and this avoidance is self-reinforcing. It keeps
anxiety at bay, which in turn reinforces avoidance of memories, thoughts,
or situations associated with anxiety or other negative affect states. An
exposure model can be useful for thinking in object relations terms about
affects associated with warded-off representations, such as when a de-
pressed patient actively wards off positive self-representations. Many pa-
tients with depressive dynamics fear feelings of pride in accomplishment
and actively ward off both the recognition of others and self-recognition.
To what degree this is best addressed by exploring the meaning of the
defense; by inducing the patient to examine and “sit with” positive, self-
warded-off self representations; or by some combination of the two ap-
proaches is an open question. For some patients, it may be that no amount
of analysis of defense will overcome the natural tendency to avoid what
is threatening. Without active confrontation of the feared situation, no
progress may be made.
Many interventions in psychoanalytic therapy actually rely heavily on
exposure (Wachtel 1997). The diminution of transference anxieties over
time is in part related to exposure as the patient recognizes that her fears
of being criticized or humiliated by the therapist are unrealistic. The patient
habituates to the anxiety with repeated visits to the therapist, who does


--- PAGE 110 ---
Goals and Therapeutic Action
95
not react in the way that the patient anticipates. As Fonagy and Target
(2000) pointed out, helping patients differentiate belief from fact, and fact
from fantasy, is a part of exposure in which the therapist acknowledges
the patient’s psychic reality of fear while simultaneously providing an al-
ternative perspective that suggests safety.
A fifth class of secondary strategies involves forms of self-disclosure. Ju-
dicious and limited self-disclosure may be useful in helping patients learn
to understand the internal world of others. (Judicious self-disclosure is
discussed at greater length in Chapter 8, “Identifying and Working With
Countertransference.”) In this regard, it may promote mentalization (Gab-
bard and Westen 2003), leading to enhanced reflective function in the pa-
tient. For example, by sharing a feeling with the patient, the analyst
might help the patient to see that his perception of how the analyst feels
is only a representation—one that can be played with and understood.
A sixth mode of secondary intervention is affirmation, as described in
Chapter 4 (“Therapeutic Interventions”). Patients who have experienced
severe childhood trauma may construe interpretation as invalidating the
patient’s subjective experience in the same way that parents disbelieve
the child’s reports of trauma. Notions of validation and acceptance have
long been central to theories of therapeutic action outside psychoanalysis
(Rogers 1959), and they began to gain acceptance in the psychoanalytic
literature with their introduction by Kohut (1971).
A final class of secondary strategies involves what might be called fa-
cilitative techniques. These are interventions that help the patient be-
come more comfortable collaborating with the therapist to understand
the workings of the mind. They can range from the use of humor or ed-
ucational comments to various forms of reassurance or soothing that can
be helpful in encouraging a patient to confront difficult or shame-induc-
ing material.
Summary
The goals in psychodynamic therapy vary according to the therapist’s fa-
vorite theory, the therapist’s own unconscious motivations, and the pa-
tient’s problems and interests. Goals may shape the preferred mode of
therapeutic action. The patient’s individual characteristics also influence
the therapeutic strategies, and no single path of therapeutic change ap-
plies to all. Some principles of change and techniques for eliciting change
are likely to be useful for most patients, while others are likely to be use-
ful only for some. Dynamic therapists should always attempt to tailor the
therapeutic strategy to the individual patient. Moreover, nothing guaran-


--- PAGE 111 ---
96
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
tees that the various goals of treatment and techniques useful for facili-
tating change outlined here will be free of elements that are conflicting
or at cross purposes, any more than we would expect people’s motives to
be free from conflict. Less active, exploratory techniques may at times
inhibit alterations in associative networks that could come about if the
patient were encouraged to confront a feared situation more directly. On
the other hand, more active techniques that foster changes in associative
networks may at times interfere with exploration, impeding the patient’s
sense of autonomy and possibly activating oppositional dynamics.
References
Adler G, Buie D: Aloneness and borderline psychopathology: the possible rele-
vance of child developmental issues. Int J Psychoanal 60:83–94, 1979
Amini F, Lewis T, Lannon R, et al: Affect, attachment, memory: contributions
towards psychobiologic integration. Psychiatry 59:213–239, 1996
Barlow DH: Anxiety and Its Disorders: The Nature and Treatment of Anxiety
and Panic, 2nd Edition. New York, Guilford, 2002
Benjamin J: An outline of intersubjectivity: the development of recognition. Psy-
choanalytic Psychology 7(suppl):33–46, 1990
Blatt SJ: The differential effects of psychotherapy and psychoanalysis with ana-
clitic and introjective patients: the Menninger Psychotherapy Research Project
revisited. J Am Psychoanal Assoc 40:691–724, 1992
Brenner C: Psychoanalytic Technique and Psychic Conflict. New York Interna-
tional Universities Press, 1976
Cooper AM: Concepts of therapeutic effectiveness in psychoanalysis: a historical
review. Psychoanalytic Inquiry 9:4–25, 1989
Fonagy P: The process of change, and the change of processes: what can change
in a “good” analysis? Keynote address to the spring meeting of Division 39 of
the American Psychological Association, New York, April 16, 1999
Fonagy P, Target M: Playing with reality, III: the persistence of dual psychic reality
in borderline patients. Int J Psychoanal 81:853–873, 2000
Gabbard GO: When the patient is a therapist: special challenges in the analysis
of mental health professionals. Psychoanal Rev 82:709–725, 1995
Gabbard GO: Love and Hate in the Analytic Setting. Northfield, NJ, Jason Aron-
son, 1996
Gabbard GO: A reconsideration of objectivity in the analyst. Int J Psychoanal 78:
15–26, 1997
Gabbard GO: On gratitude and gratification. J Am Psychoanal Assoc 48:697–
716, 2000a
Gabbard GO: Psychodynamic Psychotherapy in Clinical Practice, 3rd Edition.
Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 2000b


--- PAGE 112 ---
Goals and Therapeutic Action
97
Gabbard GO: Overview and commentary. Psychoanal Q 70:287–296, 2001
Gabbard GO, Bartlett AB: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors in the context
of an ongoing analysis. Psychoanalytic Inquiry 18:657–672, 1998
Gabbard GO, Westen D: Rethinking therapeutic action. Int J Psychoanal 84 (pt 4):
823–841, 2003
Greenberg JR: The problem of analytic neutrality. Contemp Psychoanal 22:76–
86, 1986
Holmes J: The changing aims of psychoanalytic therapy: an integrated perspec-
tive. Int J Psychoanal 79:227–240, 1998
Jacobs TJ: The corrective emotional experience—its place in current technique.
Psychoanalytic Inquiry 10:433–454, 1990
Jones EE: Modes of therapeutic interaction. Int J Psychoanal 78:1135–1150, 1997
Jones EE: Therapeutic Action. Northfield, NJ, Jason Aronson, 2000
Kohut H: The Analysis of the Self. New York, International Universities Press,
1971
Kohut H: How Does Analysis Cure? Edited by Goldberg A. Chicago, IL, Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1984
Levy S, Inderbitzin L: Safety, danger, and the analyst’s authority. J Am Psychoanal
Assoc 45:377–394, 1997
Lyons-Ruth K and members of the Change Process Study Group: Implicit rela-
tional knowing: its role and development in psychoanalytic treatment. Infant
Ment Health J 19:282–289, 1998
Mitchell SA: Influence and Autonomy in Psychoanalysis. Hillsdale, NJ, Analytic
Press, 1997
Pine F: Diversity and Direction in Psychoanalytic Technique. New Haven, CT,
Yale University Press, 1998
Pulver SE: Psychic change: insight or relationship? Int J Psychoanal 73:199–208,
1992
Raphling DL: Interpretation and expectations: the anxiety of influence. J Am
Psychoanal Assoc 43:95–111, 1995
Rogers C: A theory of therapy, personality, and interpersonal relationships, as de-
veloped in the client-centered framework, in Psychology: A Study of a Sci-
ence, Vol 3: Formulations of the Personal in the Social Context. Edited by
Koch S. New York, McGraw-Hill, pp 184–255, 1959
Siegel RS, Rosen IC: Character style and anxiety tolerance: a study of intrapsychic
change, in Research in Psychotherapy, Vol 2. Edited by Strupp H, Luborsky L.
Washington, DC, American Psychological Association, 1962, pp 206–217
Steiner J: The aim of psychoanalysis. Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy 4:109–120,
1989
Stern DN, Sander LW, Nahum JP, et al: Non-interpretive mechanisms in psycho-
analytic therapy: the “something more” than interpretation. Int J Psychoanal
79:903–921, 1998
Tronick EZ: Emotions and emotional communication in infants. Am Psychol 44:
112–119, 1989


--- PAGE 113 ---
98
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Wachtel P: Psychoanalysis, Behavior Therapy, and the Relational World. Wash-
ington, DC, American Psychological Association, 1997
Wallerstein RS: Forty-Two Lives in Treatment: A Study of Psychoanalysis and
Psychotherapy. New York, Guilford, 1986
Winnicott DW: The aims of psychoanalytic treatment (1962), in The Matura-
tional Processes and the Facilitating Environment. London, Hogarth Press,
1976, pp 166–170


--- PAGE 114 ---
99
6
Working With Resistance
Resistance is the daily bread and butter work of the dynamic therapist.
In 1912 Freud wrote, “The resistance accompanies the treatment step by
step. Every single association, every act of the person under treatment
must reckon with the resistance and represents a compromise between
the forces that are striving toward recovery and the opposing ones” (Freud
1912/1958, p. 103). As noted in Chapter 1 (“Key Concepts”), the patient’s
characteristic defenses emerge as resistances in the interpersonal setting
of therapy. Hence the way the patient opposes a therapist provides valu-
able information about the patient’s intrapsychic life.
Even though patients may be thoroughly miserable, they become at-
tached to their ways of coping with the world. They have reached an in-
ternal equilibrium that is threatened by the beginning of psychotherapy.
Change can be the most frightening prospect of all to people who are en-
trenched in specific patterns of behavior, thought, feeling, and related-
ness. Circling the wagons against the potential intrusion of the therapist
may seem like the safest course of action. Patients may resist the therapy
in myriad ways: They may come late, keep secrets, forget to pay, forget
the session, fall silent, restrict their comments to television shows they
have seen in the past week, or focus on news headlines for 30 minutes of
a 50-minute session. One of the most common forms of resistance is
avoiding any continuity in subject matter from one session to the next, as
though each hour of therapy is a new beginning.
The concept of resistance connotes an obstacle that must be removed
and thus may evoke military metaphors. The therapist may feel that a


--- PAGE 115 ---
100
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
frontal assault on the resistance is necessary to get on with the therapy,
but directly attacking resistance frequently serves to strengthen it. Dy-
namic therapists should regard the resistance as an informative and illu-
minating revelation about who the patient is.
When Freud began psychoanalytic work, he asked his patients to say
whatever came to mind. Frequently, his patients would shut down and
be unable to free associate. He gradually discovered that what shut them
down often had to do with feelings about the analyst. Thus transference
served as a resistance that stopped the analysis. At the same time, trans-
ference was enormously revealing about the patient’s internal object re-
lations and how the past repeated itself in the present. Friedman (1991)
characterized transference as “the perfect resistance insofar as it brings
reporting to a halt, but it is also the necessary (and troublesome) vehicle
conveying unconscious material into the field of analytic operation”
(p. 576).
These discoveries were made early in Freud’s career when he saw anal-
ysis as primarily a process of retrieving memories that would explain the
patient’s neurosis. As he shifted from the memory-retrieval model, he rec-
ognized that resistance should not be regarded as stoppage. He was much
more impressed with the positive desire inherent in resistance (Friedman
1991). The patient’s longings for the analyst superseded the wish for un-
derstanding. Freud gradually came to see that the clinical task was not to
clear away resistance so that memories could surface. Rather, the task was
to help patients develop a divided consciousness so that they could ob-
serve and reflect on their active aspirations toward the analyst. Hence the
opposition or resistance was redefined as a preference for nonreflective ac-
tion rather than this desired state of divided consciousness (Friedman 1991).
As Friedman put it, “The patient must feel both ‘I want...’ and ‘it is a
(troubling) feature of my mind and my life that I (conflictedly) want...’”
(p. 590).
Psychodynamic therapists often do what is counterintuitive in the con-
sulting room. Dealing with resistance is no exception. They must enter
more deeply into the resistance rather than clearing it away. The therapist
invites the patient to be curious about the resistance because a detailed
exploration of what impedes the therapy illuminates wishes, fantasies,
conflicts, and desires.
To illustrate this approach, let us consider a patient who is verbalizing
freely in the session and suddenly falls silent. Because dynamic therapy is
fundamentally noncoercive, it is not useful to insist that the patient ver-
balize what is being withheld. Most therapists would sit quietly for a bit
to see if the patient wishes to talk again. But when the silence continues,
the therapist has many options. One is to say, “I noticed that you stopped


--- PAGE 116 ---
Working With Resistance
101
talking right after you mentioned the dinner you had last night with your
mother. Any thoughts about that?”
In making this comment, the therapist invites the patient to be curious
about the occurrence of the silence/resistance right after a specific event
that is being recounted to the therapist. Another therapist might be less
inclined to make such a linkage and simply inquire, “Any thoughts about
what made you stop talking?” Transference and resistance are inevitably
linked in the clinical process, but dynamic therapists would probably
postpone introducing a transference interpretation in this case because it
would be premature to assume that the silence was related to fantasies
about the therapist. One would want to accumulate data over time sug-
gesting that a particular transference paradigm was related to the patient
falling silent. Does the patient think the therapist is critical? shaming? en-
vious? contemptuous? angry? These questions will ultimately be answered,
but not until a clear pattern of falling silent at certain times in the session
emerges.
One must grow comfortable with resistance. It is expected and is un-
derstood empathically rather than removed by fiat. Silence has multiple
meanings, and only with time do those meanings start to become clear.
With some patients, silence may be necessary for periods of time, and the
therapist can convey an acceptance of that silence. If gentle inquiries
about the origins of the silence fail to re-engage the patient, a therapist
might wish to say, “Maybe you’d prefer to sit in silence together for a
while.” The therapist conveys not only acceptance of the silence but also
a message that the patient is not alone during the silence.
Acting Out/Acting In
The original meaning of acting out can be found in Freud’s classic 1914
work, “Remembering, Repeating, and Working Through,” in which he
made the following observation: “We may say that the patient does not
remember anything of what he has forgotten and repressed, but acts it out.
He reproduces it not as a memory but as an action; he repeats it without,
of course, knowing that he is repeating it” (Freud 1914/1958, p. 150).
The original meaning, then, was of unconscious repetitions in the con-
sulting room that served as substitutes for remembering and verbalizing.
In contemporary psychodynamic parlance, these phenomena would
be referred to as acting in, since they occur within the treatment setting.
The term acting out is now used to describe events that occur outside the
therapeutic setting. For example, as described in a case example in Chap-
ter 4 (“Therapeutic Interventions”), Mr. C started dating a female doctor he


--- PAGE 117 ---
102
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
met at a social occasion as a way of acting out his transference feelings
toward his therapist. The acting out serves a resistance function because
the patient is taking something into action rather than verbalizing it and
understanding it with his therapist. The term acting out is also used to de-
scribe a general defensive style found in individuals with Cluster B per-
sonality disorders. These patients channel feelings into actions that may
be destructive to self or others instead of reflecting on the feelings and
processing them with the therapist.
As in the example of the male patient who starts dating a female doc-
tor, acting out in therapy is often related to transference issues. In other
words, it is viewed as a displacement of transference feelings onto another
figure in the patient’s life. Nevertheless, beginning therapists often make
an erroneous or poorly supported assumption that behaviors occurring
outside the clinical setting always reflect acting out of transference issues.
In fact, the behavior may or may not be linked to transference, and the
therapist may be better served by exploring it openly with the patient
rather than jumping to the immediate conclusion that the two things are
related. Often such acting-out behavior has a long history that predates
the patient’s entry into therapy.
Acting in is best defined by three features (Paniagua 1998): 1) it is a
nonverbal form of action involving somatic musculature; 2) there is con-
scious or unconscious intentionality and meaning that are potentially
conducive to the exploration of dynamics; and 3) the action or its conse-
quences occur during the treatment session and are directly observable
by the therapist.
Common examples of acting in include partially undressing in the mid-
dle of a session, leaving the session early, falling asleep, secretly tape-
recording a session, writing out a check to pay the fee but failing to sign
it, and refusing to look at the therapist. One patient brought a CD player
to the session and asked her therapist if he would like to dance with her.
The therapist responded calmly that he did not dance with patients, but
he would like to discuss with the patient her fantasy about dancing with
her therapist.
Another patient leaped from her chair during the session, turned
around 360 degrees, and said to the therapist, “You haven’t commented
on my new skirt. Do you like it?” The therapist responded by asking if the
patient had been hurt by his nonresponse.
These examples should make it clear that acting-in or acting-out be-
haviors should be understood empathically rather than regarded pejora-
tively and critically by the therapist. They are valuable conveyors of
meaning, as are all resistances, and the therapist should attempt to take
an accepting and reflective attitude toward them.


--- PAGE 118 ---
Working With Resistance
103
Kohut (1984) viewed resistances in an entirely different way than ego
psychologists. He believed that a therapist may be misguided by regard-
ing resistance as derivatives of the sexual and aggressive drives and the de-
fenses against them. Instead of interpreting or confronting defenses, self
psychologists influenced by Kohut understand such resistances in terms
of activities undertaken “in the service of psychological survival, that is,
as the patient’s attempt to save at least that sector of his nuclear self”
(p. 115). These psychologists argue that we should empathize and respect
the patient’s need for defenses and not attempt to challenge the patient
with his or her defensiveness.
Because of the highly variable nature of acting-in and acting-out be-
havior, one cannot generalize about the optimal strategy for dealing with
such resistances. Some acting out, such as engaging in unprotected sex or
drinking while driving, must be vigorously confronted because the pa-
tient’s life may be threatened by the behaviors. Patients who repeatedly
miss sessions may need to be told that therapy is impossible if they absent
themselves. Patients who cut themselves or take drugs during a session
may also need to be confronted and have limits set on the behaviors.
On the other hand, many forms of acting in need to be tolerated, ex-
plored, and observed for some time before their meaning is complete.
Much of the resistance accompanying acting-in phenomena involves trans-
ference resistance. In other words, the patient creates and lives out a par-
ticular fantasy with the therapist without observing and reflecting on the
meaning of this behavior. A clinical illustration will provide a useful ex-
ample of this phenomenon:
Ms. G, a 36-year-old woman, came to psychotherapy with Dr. H, a female
psychiatric resident, because of “problems with [her] temper.” She de-
scribed significant difficulties in multiple areas of her life. She had been
in multiple abusive relationships with men and had gone through two di-
vorces. She was afraid of being alone, and on several occasions she had
made decisions to live with men after knowing them for only 2 or 3 weeks.
Ms. G had a very strained and difficult relationship with her mother, feel-
ing that she had never received any approval from her mother. Her re-
peated experience was that her mother withdrew her affection if Ms. G
did anything of which the mother disapproved.
Ms. G had a childhood history of being sexually fondled by a step-
father at a young age. She told her mother about the fondling, and the
mother confronted the stepfather, who promised not to do it again. The
abuse continued in the same fashion, however, for the next 3–4 years. He
threatened Ms. G by saying that he would start abusing her sister if she
told anyone. After her mother and stepfather divorced when she was 13,
Ms. G told her mother about the continued abuse. Her mother expressed
outrage at the time. However, when they later became financially desper-
ate, her mother decided to move back in with the stepfather.


--- PAGE 119 ---
104
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Ms. G left home at age 15 and eventually went to college, where she
engaged in excessive drinking and sexual relationships with multiple part-
ners. She told her therapist that she had a Rolodex with the names of all
the men she had slept with.
She dropped out of college and moved out of state with a man she had
only recently met. She worked as a topless dancer and became involved
with a man who was physically and sexually abusive and who at times
threatened to kill her. She escaped this man by marrying another man she
had met only 8 weeks before. During this marriage, she had a brief affair
with a man she met on the Internet who was 10 years younger than her-
self. When her husband found out, he could not forgive her and divorced
her.
In the psychotherapy, her history unfolded in layers. Often she would
get defensive if Dr. H attempted to pin her down on exact details of what
had happened when. A pattern emerged in the therapy each week in
which Ms. G would describe an extraordinary event about which the
therapist knew nothing. One day, for example, she came into her session
and said in a cheerful voice, “I went to a PEP meeting this week.” Dr. H
asked what PEP stood for. Ms. G replied, “It’s a local group called People
Exploring People.”
Dr. H indicated that she was not aware of this organization. Ms. G
explained that it was an organization for people interested in bondage,
domination, and sadomasochism (SM). She explained that she and her
current boyfriend also practice SM: he ties her up, blindfolds her, and
chokes her. She said that she did not feel endangered by this behavior, be-
cause she felt sure that she was in control of how much choking her boy-
friend did. She said matter-of-factly to her therapist that she was really
only fully sexually satisfied when some form of SM was enacted, always
with her in the submissive role. Her therapist was surprised, if not shocked,
to hear about these activities, as there had been no previous mention of them.
In her next session Ms. G revealed that several years previously she had
been addicted to crack cocaine and had prostituted herself to get suffi-
cient funds to buy the cocaine. She boasted that on one occasion she per-
formed oral sex on five men standing in a row for $500, and on another
occasion had sex with 17 men in one night. She proudly stated to her
therapist, “That was my record.”
Each time Ms. G revealed another story, Dr. H found herself feeling
more emotionally disconnected and incredulous. She started to feel that
she could no longer relate to Ms. G in any meaningful way. In fact, the
therapist noted that she was objectifying Ms. G and feeling more and
more like she was watching a “freak show.” Reflecting on her counter-
transference, she recognized that she was beginning to objectify Ms. G in
the way that Ms. G had been objectified sexually by others throughout
her life. When telling Dr. H about one of the PEP meetings, Ms. G ex-
plained that some members of the organization perform public sex acts.
Ms. G herself described how she was tied up publicly at one of the meet-
ings while another woman used a vibrator on her. Dr. H began probing for
details about exactly what happened, trying to get a picture of the scene
in her head. Because of Ms. G’s vagueness, the therapist spent at least 10


--- PAGE 120 ---
Working With Resistance
105
minutes trying to elicit the details. At one point, Ms. G observed, “Those
acts are mostly for the exhibitionistic types.”
When the session was over, Dr. H had the uneasy feeling that something
had gone awry. Reflecting on it with her supervisor, she remembered that
Ms. G was smiling the entire time, seeming to enjoy the process with her
therapist. As Dr. H considered what had happened, she realized that it
wasn’t absolutely essential for her to obtain all the details of the scene at
the PEP meeting. Her supervisor pointed out that she had become a voy-
eur to Ms. G’s exhibitionist.
Ms. G was creating in the transference to her therapist something that
commonly occurred in her life outside the treatment. She was engaging in
a sexualized exhibitionism that shocked and fascinated Dr. H, so that she
assured herself of having the therapist’s attention. However, it served a
resistance function as well, because it was not accompanied by any reflec-
tive observation about its meaning, its origins, or how it might represent
psychological or emotional conflict for the patient. She expressed no in-
terest in changing the behavior, and Dr. H even wondered why she was
bringing it up in therapy.
This example also illustrates how acting-in behavior frequently elicits
a desired response in the therapist. Dr. H noted how the “dance” created
by the acting in of Ms. G evoked an exhibitionist-voyeur scenario similar
to what happened in the PEP meetings. However, this insight came after
some time of observing the acting in and allowing herself to be “sucked
in” by what was happening. In this regard, this form of resistance was ex-
tremely useful in that it was a revelation of a powerful internal object-
relations scenario that was present in the patient’s outside life and that
led to a good deal of difficulty in relationships, not to mention dangerous
romantic situations with partners. The therapist pointed out the pattern
to Ms. G and suggested that they might usefully explore what was going
on between them and why this repeated pattern of relatedness had so
much attraction to her. However, Dr. H also recognized that to some
extent the resistance had been a two-person phenomenon, since she had
participated through her own counter-resistance. These transference-counter-
transference recreations are inevitable, are useful to the process, and are ul-
timately discussable with the patient.
Resistance to the Awareness of Transference
Some patients offer a form of resistance in which the significance of the
therapist is repeatedly denied (Gill 1982). Before taking a 3-week vaca-
tion, a therapist said to his patient, “I wonder if you’re having any feelings
about my 3-week absence.” The patient responded that she hadn’t given


--- PAGE 121 ---
106
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
it a thought. She told the therapist that she viewed him just like an ac-
countant, a dentist, or any other professional and had no particular feel-
ings of attachment toward him. For narcissistically organized patients,
the apparent absence of the transference is the transference. These pa-
tients may have chronic difficulties in forming meaningful connections to
others, and this serious problem in object relationships manifests itself
similarly in the therapy process. From the perspective of attachment theory,
these patients have a dismissive style of attachment. Dependency may be
terrifying to such patients, and the therapist may decide that only ex-
tratransference work will be possible, recognizing that the insistence that
the therapist is not important represents an important safeguarding of the
self that prevents narcissistic wounding in the patient. In other cases, the
therapist may interpret the patient’s resistance to the awareness of trans-
ference and can help the patient overcome anxieties about dependency.
One must be judicious, however, in confronting the patient’s reluctance to
acknowledge attachment to the therapist. Therapists who are too eager to
point out transference implications of the patient’s comments may appear
excessively self-preoccupied to the patient. Paradoxically, such a therapist
may heighten the defensiveness of the patient, who will insist even more
vehemently that he or she has no feelings of any kind for the therapist.
With patients of this nature, therapists are well advised to bide their
time and look for the emergence of unmistakable transference feelings,
either in dreams or in offhand comments at the beginning or the end of
the session. There is often a particularly heightened transference associ-
ated with an “exit line” after the patient has gotten up from the chair and
moved to the door (Gabbard 1982). Occasionally the exit line may be
the most important communication of an hour, conveying a message that
the patient feels cannot be said while sitting in the chair during the for-
mal part of the session. The patient may have in mind a partition between
what is said in the chair versus what is said on the way out the door. These
comments deserve careful attention because the patient is not likely to
bring them up in the next hour. The exit line is stated while leaving be-
cause the patient wants to keep it out of the session. More precisely, the
patient is ambivalent about communicating this material in this session.
Hurling it as a parting shot is a compromise between saying it and not
saying it. A communication may be so emotionally charged that it can be
conveyed only as a session ends, when the therapist will not have an op-
portunity to respond.
Mr. I was a 28-year-old man who was seeing a female therapist in twice-
weekly dynamic psychotherapy. He frequently talked about a previous


--- PAGE 122 ---
Working With Resistance
107
therapist, whom he referred to by first name, and with whom he had a
close and affectionate relationship. His therapist would periodically sug-
gest to him that he might be telling her about the kind of relationship he
wanted with her. Mr. I denied that he had any concerns about his new
therapist and was quite satisfied with the way things were. He also denied
any curiosity about her private life. However, at the first session following
the therapist’s 2-week vacation, he strode to the door at the end of the
session and asked, “Looks like you got a tan on your vacation. Did you go
skiing with your boyfriend?” Mr. I’s therapist was caught off guard by the
question but had the presence of mind to say, “Let’s discuss it next time.”
As might be expected, Mr. I did not bring up the comment when he
showed up for his next session. After about 15 or 20 minutes of the ses-
sion, the therapist pointed out that although they had agreed to discuss
his exit line at this session, he had so far made no reference to it. He quickly
said that he had forgotten it and that it was really an inconsequential com-
ment anyway. However, the therapist persisted to explore its meaning,
and eventually Mr. I acknowledged that he was curious about the thera-
pist’s personal life and hoped to gain a special relationship like the one
that he had with his previous therapist by obtaining some inside informa-
tion about her.
Final comments in many contexts have privileged positions (Gabbard
1982). When time is running out, a sense of “now or never” comes into
play, and the patient may finally say something that has been withheld
for a long time. Final words of the therapy session are heavily invested
because they bear the feelings derived from earlier separations. In psy-
chotherapy, time is our master. At the end of each hour, the patient is re-
minded of the limits of the relationship. Exit lines can be poignant efforts
to prolong the time with the therapist or to redefine the relationship as a
personal one rather than a professional one.
One way of understanding why these words are saved for the end is
that the therapist then has no time to reject the patient. There is a feeling
of safety in bringing up the comment at the end of the hour. This expla-
nation also helps us understand why patients do not want to return to the
theme of the exit line at the next session. Therapists must be prepared to
bring up the issue if the patient “forgets.”
Aggression or anger may also be expressed in an exit line, even though
there is no hint of negative transference during the hour itself.
A 31-year-old man who had been intermittently suicidal was speaking
with his therapist during the last session before the therapist’s 1-week
absence. Although the patient expressed no concern about the absence
during the session, things changed at the end. As he reached for the door-
knob, he turned to the therapist and said, “Well, I’ll see you in 2 weeks if
I don’t commit suicide.”


--- PAGE 123 ---
108
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
This exit line was intended to leave the therapist with anxiety and guilt
about being gone for a week and abandoning the patient. Another way to
understand how the patient was handling his anger is that he attempts to
spoil the therapist’s vacation by planting the idea of suicide as a possibility
during the absence. He ensures that he will be on the mind of the therapist
during the 1-week absence. In fact, the therapist, who could not think
quickly enough to come up with a response, simply watched his patient
leave and then worried about the patient during his entire vacation. In
this way, there is both an expression of hostility and a defense against be-
ing separated from the therapist for a week. The patient imagines that a
representation of him will torment the therapist during the entire time
they are apart.
Characterological Resistances
To a large extent, therapists get to know their patients by the way pa-
tients resist the therapy process. As noted in Chapter 2 (“Assessment,
Indications, and Formulation”), the patient’s characteristic defenses be-
come resistances when the patient enters therapy. Defenses and resistances
are embedded in relatedness, and anxieties produced by the presence of
the therapist become apparent as the patient enters into the process. The
specific characterological defenses and internal object relations that have
been etched in the patient’s neural networks over a lifetime will come to
the fore in each case, so the patient’s fundamental personality is pre-
sented in bold relief when the threat of being known by someone (i.e., a
therapist) is confronted.
The dynamic therapist may find it useful to track the emotional state
of the patient. The way that the patient handles disturbing affects will say
a great deal about the characterological defenses of that patient. Feelings
of shame and humiliation may prevent the patient from assimilating ob-
servations made by the therapist. A specific intrapsychic conflict may be
heralded by the emergence of a certain feeling state. When a flash of an-
ger, sadness, or anxiety appears in the session, what does the patient do
with it? Abrupt shifts from one topic to another may represent a defen-
sive flight from a subject that evoked anger, for example. The therapist
may wish to call attention to a patient’s conflict about the anger and the
defensive strategy used to deal with it (Gray 1990). A clinical example
will illustrate the emergence of characterological resistances and how
they may be addressed in dynamic therapy.
Mr. J was a 38-year-old man who came to treatment with concerns about
relationships and work. He sat on the edge of his chair and spoke at con-


--- PAGE 124 ---
Working With Resistance
109
siderable length about his issues. He informed Dr. K that he had been able
to identify eight contributing problems. He brought written notes with
him and went through the notes systematically. Problem 1 was an ambig-
uous conflicted relationship with a female colleague. Under the heading
of her name, Mr. J had generated a list of 12 different thoughts and de-
scriptions of their previous interactions. One of these items, titled “Info
on her,” had its own list of 12 facts that he felt were relevant to under-
standing their relationship. Despite the clear importance of this relation-
ship, Mr. J talked about these matters in a way in which no affect was
really expressed whatsoever.
Dr. K noted the obsessive-compulsive characterological style of the pa-
tient early in the process. The patient used a host of defenses associated
with that personality disorder, including doing and undoing, isolation of
affect, reaction formation, and intellectualization. Mr. J clearly controlled
his feelings by compiling facts and “data.” His problem list and the lists
within the list were a way of gaining an illusion of control over difficult
feelings. In this way he could avoid “losing control,” a situation he feared
almost more than anything else. It was also clear that he attempted to
control the therapeutic situation in the same way that he tried to control
the relationship with his female colleague. He would use the time in the
therapy sessions to describe in great detail the facts associated with his ex-
perience of feeling weak and overwhelmed. He would identify all of the
aspects of the conflicted relationship with the woman and review every
detail of that situation, both in and outside the session.
Mr. J arrived at one session, for example, by stating, “I just don’t know
what to do. All I’ve been doing is thinking about this girl.” He reported
that she had called a few nights earlier at 4:30 in the morning asking him
to wake up because she had something important to talk about. Mr. J said,
“I laughed at her and told her she should be getting sleep. I think she
thought I was being rude because she hung up.” After describing this in-
teraction, Mr. J reported that he had been thinking about why she called
and now knows what she wanted to talk about. He made reference to a
time she had led him to believe that they would be having dinner together
at her apartment. When he arrived, he found that three other male guests
were already present. Mr. J stated, “I think she’s finally feeling guilty
about that night. She knows she hurt me, and now she wants to see what
I’ll say.” He went on to describe in detail how, despite her guilt, she still
could not control herself from bringing up the situation out of a desire to
be punitive and mean. Dr. K noted that most of the information and facts
Mr. J claimed to know were largely extrapolations from a rather vague 30-
second phone call. He also noted that in Mr. J’s rambling, detailed account,
there was an obsessional overinclusiveness that hid the forest by attention
to the trees. This cognitive style and defensive way of approaching affec-
tively charged material, typical of many obsessive-compulsive personality
disorders, controlled the entire session so that Mr. J’s therapist found it very
difficult to get a word in edgewise. When the therapist would try to talk,
Mr. J would often respond by saying, “Let me just finish the account first.”
Often the entire 50 minutes would be filled up with the various extrap-
olations that Mr. J had developed from brief encounters with the woman


--- PAGE 125 ---
110
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
and left almost no time for any input from the therapist. In this way, Mr.
J controlled Dr. K, controlled his own anxiety, and deprived himself of
getting help.
Another difficult issue that arose in the therapy was Mr. J’s strong need
to derive the perfect solution before taking the action. This perfectionism
manifested itself in sessions when Mr. J became paralyzed with inde-
cisiveness after outlining the pros and cons of two competing plans of ac-
tions. He would then undertake an extensive examination of the pros and
cons and conclude that one particular plan of action was better than the
others. Just when he appeared to have decided on the best plan, he would
revert back to an alternative position, thinking that what he had chosen
might, in the long run, be the wrong decision.
Like many people with obsessive-compulsive character structure, Mr. J
was plagued with doubt about any decision that was made for fear that
the outcome would be less than perfect. Hence the pattern of doing (de-
cision making) and undoing (revoking the decision) was a recurrent pat-
tern within the psychotherapy. The doing and undoing also applied to his
conflicts about his expressions of anger or aggression. In one instance, he
did not say “hello” to the receptionist at the entrance to the office building
where he saw Dr. K, and he became terribly concerned that he might have
hurt the receptionist in some way. Therefore he left the waiting room to
go back down the elevator and tell the receptionist “Good morning” be-
fore his session began.
At times, the paralyzing indecisiveness led Mr. J to beg Dr. K to pro-
vide the perfect solution to his dilemma so that his choice would be the
“correct” one. For example, at one session he said to his therapist, “My
mother wants to come to our next session and meet with us. I think it’s a
good idea so she can tell you what she observes about me. What do you
think?” The therapist asked Mr. J about why he felt this was useful and
also noted the urgency with which he approached the issue. Mr. J said he
had been thinking about the usefulness of such a meeting for some time
and was feeling pressure from his family to make arrangements. He out-
lined potential pros and cons, eventually settling on the idea that it might
be best to postpone a meeting with his mother until there was a clearer
sense of what the specific goals were for the meeting. Having reached the
conclusion that it would be a good idea to postpone the meeting, Mr. J
and Dr. K ended the session, and the patient walked to the door. Mr. J’s
exit line reversed the decision, “So I think I’ll see if my mother can come
next time. I think that will be the best.”
After Mr. J left, Dr. K felt that all the tiring work they had done during
the past hour had disappeared. It was as though a drawn-out contract ne-
gotiation had fallen apart at the last moment. Dr. K was left fuming about
what had happened, and he felt he needed to address this with the patient
next time. At the beginning of the next session, Dr. K made the following
observation, “I know you want my opinion on what to do here, but I often
feel I know too little about your experience to make such suggestions.
Last time we worked together to make a decision that I strongly endorse,
only to have you change your mind as you left the office. I think one of
the ways that you create conflict in your relationships is engaging people
