

--- PAGE 151 ---
136
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Therapists may begin to appreciate that the projective identification is
occurring when they begin to experience that they are not acting like
themselves. They become abnormally angry, unusually forgiving, atypi-
cally bored, or excessively voyeuristic. When the feeling that “I’m not
myself” appears, therapists should carefully consider what might be tran-
spiring between them and their patients.
At times the manifestations of countertransference are much more sub-
tle. Like transference, countertransference is unconscious, at least ini-
tially. Hence therapists may know about their countertransference only
through various kinds of actions. They may forget a session; return a
phone call or do paperwork before taking a patient five minutes late; find
themselves clenching a fist while the patient talks; or find themselves
dressing in a special way on the day they see the patient. All of these be-
haviors might be the first sign of feelings that are still unconscious.
Projective identification can involve the projection of either a self or
an object representation. When the therapist identifies with an aspect of
the self that is projected, this process, often referred to as concordant
countertransference (Racker 1968), is closely related to empathy. If the
therapist identifies with an object representation that has been projected,
this phenomenon is known as complementary countertransference (Racker
1968). Take, for example, an adult patient who has been a victim of severe
childhood abuse. Within this patient is an object representation of an
abuser and a self representation of a victim. In the course of the therapy,
the therapist may feel like the object at times and become angry or ver-
bally abusive with the patient. At other times, the patient may be angry
and demanding, and the therapist may feel like a victim, identifying with
the patient’s self representation, while the patient is identified with her
own internal object representation of an abuser.
The challenge for the therapist is to identify the particular mix of con-
tributions from the patient and from the therapist that constitute a par-
ticular countertransference. Projective identification can be so intense
that the therapist may feel colonized by the patient’s projections and un-
able to think clearly (Schafer 1997). Therefore it may take a good deal of
time to process what is happening. Many times the powerful feelings en-
gendered by the therapy can be understood only between sessions.
We often think about containment as the process by which projective
identifications are metabolized; that is, one goes from thinking the pa-
tient’s thoughts to thinking one’s own thoughts (Gabbard and Wilkinson
1994). During the process of containment, therapists engage in several dif-
ferent activities. They don’t simply endure the patient’s unconscious at-
tack on their thinking. They carefully sort out their own contributions
versus the patient’s and contemplate how they are recreating the patient’s


--- PAGE 152 ---
Identifying and Working With Countertransference
137
internal object relations. They also try to work their way back to the de-
sired state of dual consciousness in which they are enacting something
with the patient while also observing themselves as it happens. They may
also engage in self-analysis, wherein they reflect on how their own con-
flicts are being reactivated by this particular patient. They may formulate
silent interpretations to explain what is happening before speaking. Finally,
they may simply ask for clarification from the patient to help the patient
elaborate on his or her own experience of the transference-countertransfer-
ence developments.
Not all therapists will have the same countertransference responses to
a patient. The notion of a hook in the therapist and a good fit between
patient and therapist implies that the therapist’s internal world will de-
termine to some extent the nature of the response to the patient’s trans-
ference. Ogden (1983) made the following observation: “Projective iden-
tification is a universal feature of the externalization of an internal object
relationship, i.e., of transference. What is variable is the degree to which
the external object is enlisted as a participant in the externalization of the
internal object relationship” (p. 236). Hence some therapists may not
have their “buttons pushed” by a particular patient as much as another
therapist might. Sometimes the transfer from one therapist to another
improves the therapeutic situation because the new therapist has an en-
tirely different subjectivity from the old one and is not as easily provoked.
In the 1990s, a number of American ego psychologists began contrib-
uting papers on the topic of countertransference enactment (Chused
1991; Jacobs 1993a, 1993b; McLaughlin 1991; Renik 1993; Roughton
1993). The term gradually took on a meaning quite similar to projective
identification. The fundamental idea was that “enactments occur when an
attempt to actualize the transference fantasy elicits a countertransference
reaction” (Chused 1991, p. 629). These enactments often were regarded as
involving both the narrow form of countertransference and something in-
duced by the patient. Roughton (1993) described this as actualization:
subtle forms of manipulation on the part of the patient that induce the
therapist to act or to communicate in a slightly special way or to assume
a particular role with the patient that silently gratifies the transference wish
or, conversely, defends against such a wish.
Enactments can be a kind of acting in by the patient, but American ego
psychologists have also emphasized that there can be a corresponding act-
ing in by the therapist. The idea of countertransference as a joint creation
is supported by the constructs of both projective identification and coun-
tertransference enactment. The therapist’s actual behavior influences the
patient’s transference, while the patient’s actual behavior influences the
therapist’s countertransference.


--- PAGE 153 ---
138
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Management of Countertransference
Countertransference must be identified as such before one can speak of
managing it. As noted in the discussion under “Projective Identification
and Countertransference Enactment” above, enactments may be the first
sign of feelings that are still unconscious. A dream about a patient might
be among the first signs of countertransference. One might dream of be-
ing angry with a patient or of being in bed with a patient while not having
any conscious anger or erotic feelings for the patient. In any case, when
the countertransference enters into the therapist’s conscious awareness,
then the process of containment—in which one considers the relative
contributions of therapist and patient—begins.
The therapist then has a number of options about how to manage spe-
cific countertransference feelings, all of which may be therapeutic in
some situations.
Tolerating the Countertransference
Winnicott (1971) once noted that the patient must destroy the therapist,
and the therapist must survive the patient’s attacks, before the patient
can truly make use of the therapist. Inherent in this formulation of what
happens between therapist and patient is the notion that the therapist’s
durability may be a significant factor in producing therapeutic change.
Thus at times the therapist need not do anything but simply sit with
the feelings, contain them, and finally understand them to have a power-
ful impact on the patient. When patients observe their therapist toler-
ating feelings formerly regarded as intolerable, a mutative process may
occur (Carpy 1989). When they then reintroject the feelings and rep-
resentations, they can “re-own” them without feeling quite so over-
whelmed.
Using the Countertransference to Inform 
Interpretive Understanding
Another way of managing countertransference is to use it in the service
of formulating an interpretation about the patient’s internal world. If
something is being externalized and recreated with the therapist, it re-
flects a self-other constellation within the patient’s inner world. Return-
ing to the case of Mrs. R and Dr. Q, the patient was providing a good deal
of information about her external relationships by enacting her usual
style of relating in the therapy sessions. Dr. Q recognized that she felt en-
tirely peripheral and useless to Mrs. R, and she felt that it became hard


--- PAGE 154 ---
Identifying and Working With Countertransference
139
to stay present in the session and to listen to Mrs. R’s story. Knowing that
Mrs. R described her mother and her two daughters as inattentive, Dr. Q
might have formulated an interpretation based on her countertransfer-
ence experience that went something like this: “I’ve noticed that often
you don’t quite make room for me to engage with you by sharing my ob-
servations in the sessions here. Is it possible that your daughters and your
mother appear not to be listening to you because you don’t make an ef-
fort to listen to them?”
In this interpretation, the starting point is the therapist’s countertrans-
ference experience of being shut out and being unable to speak. Since her
experience seems as if it parallels those of Mrs. R’s daughters and mother,
she offers a tentative formulation that what is going on in the therapy ses-
sion parallels what happens with Mrs. R’s family members.
This strategy is one that may backfire as well, and the therapist needs
to give careful thought to the timing. As noted in Chapter 4 (“Therapeu-
tic Interventions”), transference interpretation can be a high-risk, high-
gain proposition, especially with more disturbed patients (Gabbard et al.
1994). Some patients will not be ready to hear an interpretation if they
see it as a way the therapist is trying to unload her own feelings onto the
patient. For example, one therapist who became increasingly exasperated
with his patient who had borderline personality disorder finally said to
her: “I think you are taking all of your anger and projecting it into me.”
The patient paused for a moment and said, “Can you think of anything bet-
ter to do with it?” She was basically making it clear to him that she needed
him to take on the role of the “bad object” as a way of getting the feelings
of hatred and contempt out of herself and into someone else. In essence,
her comment was a way of supervising him to let him know that he was
prematurely unloading his difficult countertransference feelings.
Transference and countertransference can be viewed as opposite sides
of the same coin. Often the therapist may feel like getting rid of difficult
feelings by interpreting them as residing in the patient. However, in situ-
ations of intense negative transference—such as anger, hatred, envy, or
contempt—interpretation may be viewed as a confirmation that the ther-
apist is an attacker or persecutor trying to victimize the patient by cram-
ming feelings down the patient’s throat. Carpy (1989) emphasized that one
needs to postpone interpretation originating in countertransference feelings
until patients are capable of using the interpretation, which often means
when they can recognize aspects of themselves in the therapist. The ther-
apist, too, must be in a frame of mind that is optimal for using interpre-
tation. When the therapist feels colonized by projective identification,
the capacity to think, reflect, and formulate an interpretation may be se-
verely compromised.


--- PAGE 155 ---
140
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
The timing for interpretation depends a great deal on the setting and
the therapeutic moment. If both therapist and patient are in an analytic
space, meanings can be played with, understood, and considered (Ogden
1986). The notion of analytic space derives from Winnicott’s (1971) con-
cept of potential space, where patients experience the transference as
both real and not real, while the therapist can experience countertrans-
ference as both real and not real. There is an “as if” quality to each party’s
experience. A patient may feel that the therapist is unfair and unjust, but
the patient recognizes that it is “as if” the therapist is her mother rather
than insisting that the therapist is exactly like her mother. In an analytic
or potential space, a patient is capable of thinking, “I have all the intensity
of feelings I had for my mother when we would get into fights, but
I know that you are actually not the same person as my mother and that
I am imposing some of these feelings on you unfairly.” When strong feel-
ings are present in either patient or therapist, that sense of the “as if” can
collapse, which can cause the meaning of the perception of either party
to be less amenable to exploration.
Often when interpretive work is postponed until the subsequent ses-
sion, a “cooling off” has ensued whereby the capacity to enter into an an-
alytic space is restored. Both therapist and patient have processed their
strong feelings toward one another, and the atmosphere is more condu-
cive to the patient’s seeing that something has been projected into the
therapist that might not fit. Pine (1986) elucidated this useful principle
of postponement of interpretation by saying, “Strike while the iron is
cold” (p. 528).
Employing Judicious Use of Self-Disclosure
As noted in Chapter 5 (“Goals and Therapeutic Action”), thoughtful dis-
closure of the therapist’s feelings to the patient can be therapeutic even
though self-disclosure is not ordinarily regarded as a dynamic psycho-
therapy intervention. Most therapists eschew disclosures about their pri-
vate lives or about personal problems. However, a specific type of disclo-
sure involving feelings generated in the here and now of the therapeutic
situation may be highly effective in helping the patient see the impact
that she or he has on others.
In the example that opened this chapter, another strategy that Dr. Q
could have considered is to make a direct statement about her experience.
She might have said to Mrs. R, “I sometimes feel like I am just a sounding
board for you, and that you really don’t want to hear what I have to say.”
This type of self-disclosure is closely linked to confrontation, in that it
draws the patient’s awareness to the way she is treating the therapist.


--- PAGE 156 ---
Identifying and Working With Countertransference
141
Self-disclosure must be used with caution, though, because therapists
can easily deceive themselves into thinking that what they are saying is
therapeutic, when they are simply retaliating against the patient or trying
to make the patient feel guilty. We must always be suspicious about our
motives when we decide to disclose something about our feelings to the
patient. Many corrupting agendas can lie behind a sincere wish to help a
patient. Greenberg (1995) expressed some concerns about deliberate self-
disclosure when he noted, “There are always multiple perspectives on the
participation of each party. This means that whatever is revealed is simply
one person’s understanding at a given moment—never...the last word on
the subject....I am not necessarily in a privileged position to know, much
less to reveal, everything that I think or feel” (p. 197).
Because we cannot be sure what we are up to when we are disclosing
our own feelings to the patient, self-disclosure should be thought about
carefully before using it. Talking with a supervisor to discuss potential un-
foreseen consequences is generally a wise course of action. Frequently,
however, one does not have the opportunity to talk with a supervisor, es-
pecially when the self-disclosure is urged by a patient with a direct ques-
tion. For example, a patient may see nonverbal manifestations of anger
on the therapist’s face and ask, “Are you angry with me?”
In such situations, the therapist is caught on the horns of a dilemma.
If the therapist’s face is red, his jaw clenched, and his neck veins bulging,
his anger may be unmistakable, and the patient is making an accurate ob-
servation. If the therapist chooses to say, “No, I’m not angry,” the patient
then has two problems: an angry therapist and a dishonest therapist. If
the therapist is “clearly caught” in his anger, he may be much better off
acknowledging that the patient’s perception is accurate and trying to
work with it therapeutically. For example, the therapist might say, “I
think you are picking up on something going on in me. I think what you’re
doing is irritating me to some degree, and I’d like to explore that with you
since I’d rather help you than get irritated with you. Have you had this
experience with others?”
In this intervention, the therapist acknowledges the anger while also
maintaining his professional role, which is geared toward helping the pa-
tient understand himself.
Some feelings, however, should probably not be disclosed for fear of bur-
dening the patient unnecessarily or collapsing the analytic space in which
the perception of the therapist is in the “as if” realm. For example, dis-
closing sexual feelings to the patient will rarely be useful. If the therapist
admits having sexual feelings for the patient, he or she may feel that it is
difficult to continue talking about sexual feelings in a symbolic realm. As
Modell (1991) has noted, “Gratification at any one level of reality leads to


--- PAGE 157 ---
142
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
paradoxical frustration at another” (p. 26). What should have remained
symbolic becomes concrete when one acknowledges sexual feelings for
the patient. A father would not tell his daughter that he had sexual feel-
ings for her, even though the daughter might sense such feelings through
interactions with her father. The fact that a father does not disclose such
feelings toward his daughter allows her to engage in an important devel-
opmental task involving a complex fantasy about him as a love object,
knowing there is an aura of safety to do so, created by the boundaries the
father establishes (Gabbard 1996).
By analogy, a male therapist who expresses sexual feelings toward a fe-
male patient is likely to make her feel that the therapeutic setting is not
as safe as she had previously thought. If he is directly asked by his patient
if he has sexual feelings for her, he might choose a modified version of
self-disclosure by disclosing his dilemma about answering the question.
For example, he might say to her, “Your question places me in a real di-
lemma. If I say ‘No, I don’t find you sexually attractive,’ you may feel
devastated. If I say that I do, you may feel that this therapy is not as safe
a place as you had thought it was. So I think it’s best not to answer that
question.”
As a general principle, one can fall back on sharing the dilemma rather
than disclosing direct feelings in many situations where self-disclosure
has been considered. For example, Dr. Q could also have said to Mrs. R,
“I’m in a dilemma here because I feel like I have to barge in and interrupt
you to make an observation. On the other hand, if I say nothing, I feel
like I’m not being of any help to you. Any thoughts about how we can
manage this dilemma?”
Varieties of Countertransference
Rescue Fantasies
The wish to rescue the patient is pervasive among people who choose to
be psychotherapists. We all wish to make a difference in our patients’
lives, and particular patients tug at our heartstrings in a special way that
makes us want to become actively involved in the rescue, even though it
may take us outside of a purely psychotherapeutic role. Certain types of
rescue wishes may go completely unnoticed as a category of countertrans-
ference because they are so consonant with therapists’ views of themselves
as healers. The therapist’s heroic efforts to save a patient from suicide,
for example, may seem ethical, caring, and entirely appropriate. If a ther-
apist in this situation begins to take calls at all hours of the night, extends
sessions by 20 or 30 minutes, and professes undying love for the patient,


--- PAGE 158 ---
Identifying and Working With Countertransference
143
then one might wonder if the rescue effort has gotten out of control as a
result of serious countertransference difficulties.
Many countertransference fantasies are inextricably linked to specific
transference fantasies. For example, patients who harbor the golden fan-
tasy (described in Chapter 7: “Use of Dreams and Fantasies in Dynamic
Psychotherapy”) may seek treatment with the hope that their fantasy of
finding a perfect rescuer will be fulfilled by the psychotherapist (Smith
1977). When these patients discover that all of their fantasies will not
come to fruition because of the professional boundaries inherent in the
psychotherapy relationship, they may become desperate and convey to
the therapist that only a cold and callous ogre would deny the gratifica-
tion of their transference wish. This wish to be rescued may be a “good
fit” with the therapist’s preexisting rescue fantasies, and the therapist
may feel compelled to step outside the professional role and become a lit-
eral rescuer for fear that the patient will be devastated if professional
boundaries are maintained. Some therapists may hug the patient. Others
may give the patient money to buy food. Still others may take the patient
on social outings to try to convey that the therapist is caring and is not
simply doing a job.
The optimal management of these rescue fantasies is to recognize
them in their earliest form, before they actually become boundary trans-
gressions. For example, if a female therapist is feeling like mothering her
female patient by holding her and putting her head on her breast, she
should recognize that she is at risk for enacting such a fantasy. She may
then assist the patient in the necessary mourning process entailed in not
having all of one’s fantasies gratified in the therapeutic relationship. She
might say to the patient, “I know how difficult it is for you that I can’t be
a literal mother who will hold you and love you, but we can understand
how this longing affects your life and particularly how it influences other
relationships. I can still be of help to you in providing that understanding,
even if I can’t directly gratify that wish.” Often the avoidance of setting
limits is fueled by another countertransference fantasy that the therapist
is being sadistic if the patient’s longings are not gratified. In the long run,
however, indulging the fantasies may lead to false hope that is ultimately
even more cruel to the patient. The mourning process must not be by-
passed. Sooner or later, the patient has to mourn what she missed in
childhood and what she cannot receive now from the therapist.
The Bored or Sleepy Therapist
Listening to patients all day can be exhausting to the therapist, but cer-
tain patients may promote a countertransference boredom or sleepiness


--- PAGE 159 ---
144
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
more than others. A beginning therapist’s usual response to sleepiness or
boredom is to feel guilty, as though it is emblematic of doing something
wrong. Beginning therapists may chastise themselves and work harder to
stay alert and listen carefully to the patient.
A central feature of psychodynamic therapy, though, is to explore one’s
own feelings in a nonjudgmental way to discern some as-yet unfathomed
part of the therapeutic process that may illuminate hidden meanings. Why
is this particular patient on this particular day boring? The therapist could
be sleepy because she was up all night taking calls in the hospital. On the
other hand, the last patient may not have induced this feeling in her in the
way her current patient does. Why is there a difference, when the same
amount of sleep deprivation is active in both processes?
Patients are boring for different reasons, and therapists experience them
as boring for a multitude of reasons. Some patients are characterologically
boring in all settings. A patient with obsessive-compulsive personality
disorder, for example, may try to retain tight control over all spontaneous
feelings by talking in a dry, affectless monotone and including a great
many irrelevant details. The patient may also be attempting to “anesthetize”
the therapist with this style of controlling the sessions so that the therapist
is unable to make an unexpected intervention that might catch the patient
by surprise.
A patient with narcissistic personality disorder, on the other hand, may
bore the therapist because of the total self-absorption inherent in the pa-
tient’s narrative. The therapist is not regarded as having a meaningful role
in the patient’s life, and the use of the therapist as a sounding board be-
gins to dull the senses of the therapist, who feels there is no role for the ther-
apist’s interventions in the patient’s monologue. A steady feeling of non-
existence may create feelings of drowsiness and intense boredom in any
therapist who treats such a patient.
There are other patients who are lively and engaging most of the time,
but on one particular day or around one particular topic they become ex-
cruciatingly boring and difficult to listen to. As with any other counter-
transference feeling, therapists may wish to begin by studying themselves
to determine if they are having difficulty with the subject of the therapy.
Does the boredom say more about the therapist than it does about the
patient? Some therapists may feel anger at the patient and try to dull
their anger by feeling sleepy and bored so as not to fully experience the
intensity of the anger. Alternatively, certain patients may express their
anger by trying to bore the therapist to death. (One should keep in mind
that the phrase “to put to sleep” means “to kill” in veterinary usage.)
Whatever the cause of the boredom and sleepiness, beginning therapists
must resist the urge to simply disparage themselves and tank up ahead of


--- PAGE 160 ---
Identifying and Working With Countertransference
145
time on more and more caffeine. The art of therapy includes making the
boring patient a fascinating subject of study. What is the patient getting
out of inducing this state in others? Actively exploring with the patient
what is going on between the two parties may be a way of perking up the
therapist while also interrupting a vicious cycle of sleep-inducing bore-
dom.
Here are some examples of interventions that might be considered in
such cases: “You know, I have the feeling that you are not terribly inter-
ested in what you are saying today. You seem to be kind of going through
the motions.” “When you talk today, I get the impression that you really
don’t expect me to be terribly interested in what you’re saying.” “What do
you think is going on right now between the two of us in here?” Any of
these interventions, or others like them, open up the interpersonal field
of the therapy for exploration and emphasize that there are two people
in the room, and each is affecting the other.
Erotic Countertransference
Sexual feelings for a patient can be quite discombobulating for a therapist.
Beginning therapists may project their emerging sexual feelings into the
patient and see the erotic feelings as emanating purely from the patient.
This defensive maneuver is particularly common when a beginning male
therapist is treating a female patient. As a way of managing the disturbing
erotic feelings that emerge from the countertransference, the male thera-
pist may refer to the female patient as “seductive” (Gabbard 2000). In this
way, the problem lies in the patient, rather than in the therapist.
In other cases, the erotic countertransference remains unconscious, but
the therapist begins to notice minor enactments suggestive of special inter-
est in the patient. Some therapists might check the mirror before they see
the patient. Others might pay special attention to what they wear on the
day they see the patient. Some may find themselves unusually sympathetic
to the patient. Certain negative issues may be avoided for fear of upsetting
the patient. A case example illustrates some of these themes:
Dr. S was a 32-year-old female psychiatric resident treating a 34-year-old
male attorney. The attorney had recently been dumped by his girlfriend,
and he spoke at great length in the sessions about his feelings of devasta-
tion. He recounted how she had such high demands that he was unable
to meet her perfectionist expectations.
Dr. S listened to her patient with considerable concern. She felt that
the patient had probably been poorly treated by his ex-girlfriend, who
had been entirely unreasonable in her demands on him. She also thought
that he was a genuinely good-hearted person who had made a sincere ef-


--- PAGE 161 ---
146
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
fort to make the relationship work. After several weeks of therapy, she
noted a striking departure from her usual therapeutic strategy. She had not
asked the patient on a single occasion what he had contributed to the dif-
ficulties. She tended to see the ex-girlfriend as the villain of the piece, while
the patient was predominantly regarded as a victim of ridiculous expec-
tations. Dr. S also noted that almost all of her interventions were em-
pathic in nature and that she withheld any confrontational comments for
fear of hurting the patient’s feelings.
She also began to think that her patient needed to find a more sympa-
thetic woman. She became convinced that if he had had a better match,
he would not be in the current situation at all. She found herself encour-
aging him to find women with more reasonable expectations who could
be more sympathetic to him rather than demanding. In the course of the
sessions, she had fleeting thoughts that maybe she would be a good match
for him if they had not met under the conditions of the current profes-
sional relationship. She even found herself speculating on what he might
provide to her that her own husband did not.
With the help of her supervisor, Dr. S gradually recognized that her
countertransference enactment took the form of what she said, rather than
what she did. Although her behavior was entirely professional, she al-
lowed the patient to get off the hook in terms of his own responsibility.
Almost all of her comments empathized with how awful he felt, rather
than helping him take a clear-eyed look at how he might have undermined
the relationship so that the same thing wouldn’t happen with the next ro-
mantic partner. Her supervisor also helped her to see that she was harbor-
ing a fantasy similar to that of the patient—namely, that the problem was
finding “Ms. Right” rather than looking within at patterns in him that might
undermine relationships.
Erotic countertransference often manifests itself in rescue fantasies be-
cause they are relatively more acceptable to the therapist’s conscious per-
ception of his or her professional role than overt sexual feelings (Gabbard
1994). The feelings may arise in direct response to the patient’s nudging.
Dr. S was undoubtedly being influenced by the engaging presentation of
the patient that painted him as a victim of the mistreatment of a harsh and
unsympathetic woman. He managed to gain Dr. S’s sympathy and was at-
tempting to seduce her into taking his side (and doing a rather good job
of it!). One therapeutic strategy that Dr. S might have considered is to
interpret her patient’s wish to get her completely on his side by the way
he presented himself. In other words, she would have made a major point
of how his style of telling his story was designed to enlist her as an ally or
a “better woman” than his ex-girlfriend.
At times, erotic countertransference may seem unmanageable to the
therapist. Certain patients are so attractive and appealing that therapists
may find themselves incapable of thinking clearly and acting with the pa-
tient’s best interests in mind. In such cases, supervision or consultation is


--- PAGE 162 ---
Identifying and Working With Countertransference
147
essential. If talking with a colleague is not helpful and the problem con-
tinues, referral to another therapist should be considered. Some thera-
pists may wish to automatically set up a meeting with a consultant or a
supervisor whenever they begin treatment with a new patient whom
they find especially attractive.
Incapacitating Countertransference
There are times in the lives of most therapists when they feel as though
they can no longer think like a therapist or function in a professional role
because of their reaction to a patient. These incapacitating moments can
occur under a variety of circumstances. In some cases, a therapist might
feel physically threatened and make a comment such as “When you frighten
me in this way, I can’t think. We need to make this a safe environment
for us to continue to work in therapy.” Some patients may be so overtly
seductive and frankly sexual in their overtures to the therapist that the
therapist feels the frame of the therapy is being violated and he or she
cannot function as a therapist. One male therapist, for example, was ren-
dered silent when a female patient unbuttoned her blouse and showed her
breasts to him. He felt it was impossible to do therapy, so he told her to
button up her blouse and sit back down in her chair. Direct limit-setting
was probably the best approach for the moment, while he bought himself
some time to think.
At times, intense explosions of anger can make the therapist feel inca-
pacitated.
Ms. T was a patient with borderline personality disorder who had been
seeing Dr. U for approximately 8 months in long-term dynamic psycho-
therapy. She repeatedly brought in reports of arguments over the phone
with her mother. On this particular occasion, the patient began the ses-
sion with Dr. U by describing a phone conversation on the previous night.
She said that her mother had asked her how her job was going, and Ms. T
became convinced that her mother was suspicious that she had quit the
job and was checking up on her. Dr. U replied that he thought this might
be the type of example they had discussed before, where she was constru-
ing her mother’s interest and care in the most negative manner possible.
Ms. T sulked and stared at the floor and said, “Yes...I am aware that I do
that sometimes.” Dr. U told her that he thought she looked hurt.
Ms. T then became extremely upset. Her face was red to the point of
looking like she would explode, and she screamed at the top of her lungs
at him: “I don’t know why you’re saying this! I already know that I do
that! I could have told you that before you even said anything! I know
that I see things she says negatively. That’s why I’m discussing it here! I’m
trying to understand my behavior. I can’t believe you would say anything
so obvious and stupid!”


--- PAGE 163 ---
148
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Dr. U was completely taken aback by the explosion of anger, which he
had not anticipated in the least. He felt ashamed, abused, misunderstood,
falsely accused, and enraged. He felt that her behavior was entirely inap-
propriate in response to what he had observed, and he felt that nothing
he could say would be useful. So he simply remained silent. The patient
could see how upset he was, and Ms. T simply stopped screaming and
fumed silently as she stared at the floor. Finally she said to Dr. U, “Well,
aren’t you going to say anything?”
Dr. U decided to use some self-disclosure and said, “I’m so distressed
by your shouting at me that I really don’t think I can say anything very
helpful at this point.”
The two of them remained silent for awhile. Then Dr. U finally spoke:
“What I was trying to do was to help put your reaction into a larger pat-
tern so you could understand your assumptions about your mother, rather
than just assume she was checking up on you. I had no idea that you
would become so angry when I made that comment.”
Ms. T looked sheepish: “Now I’m feeling guilty that I hurt you.”
Dr. U responded, “I think what you’re picking up on is my feeling that
my attempt to help you is misunderstood by you. My predominant reac-
tion is not so much that you hurt me but that you completely misunder-
stood what I was trying to get across. I had no idea that you would ex-
plode like that.”
Ms. T responded, “Isn’t it good to be angry?”
Dr. U inquired, “How so?”
Ms. T replied, “Well, the psychologist who did my testing said that for
me, anger is gold.”
Dr. U asked her if she thought the psychologist meant that exploding
at people is gold.
Ms. T reflected for a moment and said, “Probably not. The patients in
my group therapy say it frightens them and alienates them when I get an-
gry there. They also told me they stop listening to what I say. But it feels
good for me to do it. I wish you would like it when I get angry with you,
because I think it’s good for me.”
Her therapist said, “If you try to reflect on this for a moment and
imagine my experience of the explosion, what do you think I’d like about
it?”
Ms. T responded rapidly to the question: “If someone screams at you,
that means that you must mean something to them. Someone cares
enough to scream at you and get upset with you. It gets their attention!
I would feel connected. I would much rather have somebody scream at me
than to act passive-aggressive. A lot of people try to act nice then they’re
really mad at you, and they don’t let you know it.”
Dr. U responded, “It sounds like you imagine that I feel the same way
you do, instead of how I actually feel.”
Ms. T then said, “Well, I’d like for you to, but I realize you probably
feel different from some people. I just wish I could do things that feel
good for me, and other people would appreciate them instead of getting
alienated from me because of them.”
Her therapist then asked if she was worried that she had alienated him.


--- PAGE 164 ---
Identifying and Working With Countertransference
149
Ms. T responded, “No, I don’t think so. I think it’s good for me to get
anger out instead of keeping it pent up inside. It’s a destructive process to
keep your anger inside of you all the time.”
Dr. U responded, “But isn’t there a middle ground, a vast middle
ground between exploding and keeping it all in? Maybe we’ve defined a
good goal to work on here.”
In this vignette, Dr. U has gone from being completely incapacitated
in his ability to respond to making productive use of the moment. Ini-
tially, he could only sit silently because he was at a loss for words. Ther-
apists should always feel free to delay responding until they are ready. Es-
pecially with borderline patients, therapists may frequently want to say
that they need time to think about what has happened before giving a
knee-jerk response. Dr. U used this to his advantage because he could then
discuss what happened in a way that promoted mentalization in Ms. T. He
continually pointed out that she imagined that he felt the way that she
felt. He tried to get her to see that there were other possibilities. He also
had her reconsider the all-or-nothing thinking that one either keeps anger
inside or explodes. This helped her to moderate between extremes so she
could reconsider the best way to manage anger.
Summary
Countertransference is a ubiquitous phenomenon that should not be re-
garded pejoratively. The prevailing view is that countertransference feel-
ings involve a joint creation with contributions from both patient and
therapist. Projective identification and countertransference enactment are
two terms from different theoretical traditions that describe how the pa-
tient uses subtle interpersonal pressure to transform the therapist into an
approximation of the patient’s internal representation. There are a number
of different techniques the therapist may use to manage countertrans-
ference. These include tolerating the countertransference, using it to in-
form interpretive understanding, and employing judicious self-disclosure.
Common varieties of countertransference include rescue fantasies, bore-
dom or sleepiness, erotic feelings, and feelings of helplessness or incapac-
itation.
References
Bion WR: Learning From Experience. London, Heinemann, 1962a
Bion WR: The psycho-analytic study of thinking, II: a theory of thinking. Int J
Psychoanal 43:306–310, 1962b (Reprinted in Bion WR: Second Thoughts:
Selected Papers on Psychoanalysis. London, Heinemann, 1967, pp 110–119)


--- PAGE 165 ---
150
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
Carpy DV: Tolerating the countertransference: a mutative process. Int J Psycho-
anal 70:287–294, 1989
Chused JF: The evocative power of enactments. J Am Psychoanal Assoc 39:615–
639, 1991
Gabbard GO: Sexual excitement and countertransference love in the analyst. J Am
Psychoanal Assoc 42:1083–1106, 1994
Gabbard GO: Countertransference: the emerging common ground. Int J Psycho-
anal 76:475–485, 1995
Gabbard GO: Love and Hate in the Analytic Setting. Northvale, NJ, Jason Aron-
son, 1996
Gabbard GO: Psychodynamic Psychotherapy in Clinical Practice, 3rd Edition.
Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 2000
Gabbard GO, Wilkinson SM: Management of Countertransference With Border-
line Patients. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 1994
Gabbard GO, Horwitz L, Allen JG, et al: Transference interpretation in the psy-
chotherapy of borderline patients: a high-risk, high-gain phenomenon. Harv
Rev Psychiatry 2(1):59–69, 1994
Greenberg JR: Self-disclosure: is it psychoanalytic? Contemp Psychoanal 31:193–
205, 1995
Jacobs TJ: The inner experiences of the psychoanalyst: their contribution to the
analytic process. Int J Psychoanal 74:7–14, 1993a
Jacobs TJ: Insight and experience: commentary on Morris Eagle’s enactments,
transference, and symptomatic curing. Psychoanalytic Dialogues 3:123–127,
1993b
Kernberg OF: Factors in the psychoanalytic treatment of narcissistic personalities.
J Am Psychoanal Assoc 18:51–85, 1970
Klein M: Notes on some schizoid mechanisms (1946), in Envy and Gratitude and
Other Works, 1946–1963. New York, Delacorte Press/Seymour Laurence,
1975, pp 1–24
McLaughlin JT: Clinical and theoretical aspects of enactment. J Am Psychoanal
Assoc 39:595–614, 1991
Modell AH: The therapeutic relationship as a paradoxical experience. Psycho-
analytic Dialogues 1:13–28, 1991
Ogden TH: On Projective identification. Int J Psychoanal 60:357–373, 1979
Ogden TH: Projective Identification and Psychotherapeutic Technique. New
York, Jason Aronson, 1982
Ogden TH: The concept of internal object relations. Int J Psychoanal 664:227–
241, 1983
Ogden TH: The Matrix of the Mind: Object Relations and the Psychoanalytic
Dialogue. Northvale, NJ, Jason Aronson, 1986
Ogden TH: The dialectically constituted/decentred subject of psychoanalysis, II:
the contributions of Klein and Winnicott. Int J Psychoanal 73:613–626,
1992
Pine F: Supportive psychotherapy: a psychoanalytic perspective. Psychiatr Ann
16:526–529, 1986


--- PAGE 166 ---
Identifying and Working With Countertransference
151
Racker H: Transference and Countertransference. New York, International Uni-
versities Press, 1968
Renik O: Analytic interaction: conceptualizing technique in light of the analyst’s
irreducible subjectivity. Psychoanal Q 62:553–571, 1993
Rosenfeld HA: Notes on the psycho-analysis of the superego conflict of an acute
schizophrenic patient. Int J Psychoanal 31:111–131, 1952 (Reprinted in
Klein M [ed]: New Directions in Psycho-Analysis. London, Tavistock, 1955,
pp 180–219)
Roughton RE: Useful aspects of acting out: repetition, enactment, and actualiza-
tion. J Am Psychoanal Assoc 41:443–472, 1993
Schafer R: Vicissitudes of remembering in the countertransference: fervent fail-
ure, colonization, and remembering otherwise. Int J Psychoanal 78:1151–
1163, 1997
Scharff JS: Projective and Introjective Identification and the Use of the Thera-
pist’s Self. Northvale, NJ, Jason Aronson, 1992
Smith S: The golden fantasy: a regressive reaction to separation anxiety. Int J Psy-
choanal 58:311–324, 1977
Symington N: The possibility of human freedom and its transmission (with par-
ticular reference to the thought of Bion). Int J Psychoanal 71:95–106, 1990
Winnicott DW: Playing and Reality. New York, Basic Books, 1971


--- PAGE 167 ---
This page intentionally left blank 


--- PAGE 168 ---
153
9
Working Through and 
Termination
Trainees who learn long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy are often
perplexed by the task of determining when enough is enough. External
factors, like changing a clinical rotation, may be the determinant of when
work with a patient stops, often leading to the patient being transferred
to another trainee. Much of the work of psychotherapy seems repetitive,
and the end point may seem arbitrary.
When Freud developed psychoanalysis, he felt that working through was
the process that ultimately created changes that would lead to a natural
termination of the process. However, the definition of the term remained
somewhat vague throughout his writings. He appeared to have in mind a
process through which characteristic patterns of defenses and internal object
relationships emerge again and again in different contexts and are repeti-
tively interpreted, observed, confronted, and clarified until the patient re-
linquishes the resistances to accepting the analyst’s interpretive understand-
ing. Much of the work with resistances discussed in Chapter 6 (“Working
With Resistance”) could be viewed as the heart of the working-through pro-
cess. Shafer (1983) defined working through as analyzing resistances “again
and again, patiently, through a seemingly endless series of repetitions, per-
mutations, combinations, and variations” (p. 76). He also felt that part of the
working through of these resistances involves a recognition that the resis-
tances or defenses are the patient’s own creation and responsibility. Hence a
key factor in working through and in readiness for termination would be the


--- PAGE 169 ---
154
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
patient’s sense of being an agent or author of his or her own life.
As psychoanalytic theory has moved from a drive-defense emphasis to
a greater reliance on object relations and attachment theories, working
through has begun to take on new meanings. The working through of the
relationship with the therapist as a new object that will serve to alter old
object relations patterns moves to center stage. In addition, working
through also involves a recognition of how the relationship with the ther-
apist reflects relationships from childhood and current extratransference
relationships (see Figure 9–1).
This triangle of insight involving relationship patterns is crucial to the
systematic working-through process of repetitive problematic relation-
ships (Menninger 1958). The therapist identifies the recurrent relationship
patterns in every aspect of the patient’s experience. Luborsky’s (1984)
concept of the core conflictual relationship theme (noted in Chapter 7:
“Use of Dreams and Fantasies in Dynamic Psychotherapy”) is another way
of approaching this repetitive process. The patient’s expectation about how
others will react and a defensive response to that expectation will come up
again and again, both in the relationship with the therapist and with people
outside of therapy. The therapist points out these patterns and relates them
to the patient’s early experience.
Figure 9–1.
Triangle of insight (modeled after Menninger 1958).
Source.
Reprinted from Gabbard GO: Psychodynamic Psychiatry in Clinical Practice, Third
Edition. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Press, 2000. Used with permission.
Transference 
relationship
Current
  relationships 
      outside the
           transference 
Past relationships


--- PAGE 170 ---
Working Through and Termination
155
In the course of the confronting and clarifying of the patient’s unique
mode of object relatedness, the therapist explores with the patient the te-
nacious attachment to adverse experiences and “bad objects” from the past.
Why, for example, does a woman patient repeatedly choose male romantic
partners who are dishonest and unreliable, leading to heartbreak? A vari-
ety of explanations may emerge as the therapy continues. Attachment to
bad objects may be predictable and familiar, and the devil one knows may
be better than the devil one does not know. A bad object may also be bet-
ter than no object at all. A woman’s repeated involvement with men who
are unreliable and dishonest may also preserve a fundamental attachment
to her mother, who made it clear that men were not to be trusted and
that when push came to shove, one could rely only on one’s mother to be
a loyal confidante. The woman may also harbor a fantasy of transforming
“bad” men into “good” men.
At the same time that the patient is engaging in self-defeating relation-
ships outside the therapy, she may also be entrenched in a pattern of re-
latedness with the therapist that is less than optimal. She may persist in
seeing the relationship pattern she encounters as a problem of not finding
the right man, and therefore she expects the therapist to rescue her from
a string of bad experiences by being the idealized and perfect man in her
life. This variation of the golden fantasy may need to be confronted and
interpreted repeatedly until the patient finally recognizes that she will
have to find a way to rescue herself from her life rather than to expect a
knight in shining armor to emerge.
Fantasies die hard. Much of the difficult working-through process in-
volves helping the patient to mourn the loss of unrealistic dreams and fan-
tasies that get in the way of a natural developmental pathway toward ma-
turity. Giving up these fantasies may be intensely resisted, and the patient
may fight the therapist to preserve her vision of how things should be.
As the process of working through unfolds, the patient is also internal-
izing a certain way of viewing herself and her internal world that the ther-
apist has modeled for her. Thus accepting the therapist’s way of thinking
is part of working through. The therapist has also resisted being trans-
formed into something other than a therapist (Aron 1991). In contem-
porary parlance, part of what is worked through is the actual relationship
between therapist and patient so that the patient openly accepts who the
therapist is and the limits of the relationship. As noted in Chapter 5
(“Goals and Therapeutic Action”), patients don’t get better simply be-
cause the therapist acts like a “good” object. What is critical is that pa-
tients repeat with their therapist certain patterns of complicated related-
ness that have haunted them throughout their lives. In the process, the
old neural networks involving maladaptive self and object representa-


--- PAGE 171 ---
156
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
tions are gradually weakened, while the new neural networks involving a
different kind of relatedness are strengthened. Just as a patient’s defenses
are developed over a lifetime, so are the neural networks representing ob-
ject relationships, and only time is likely to make durable changes in these
structures.
To summarize what is being said, therapists do indeed function as new
objects that are internalized by the patient. However, they are also drawn
into playing problematic figures from the patient’s past, and one of the
therapist’s tasks is to help patients see how they themselves recreate con-
flictual patterns of object relationships in the here-and-now laboratory of
the transference-countertransference interactions. So the insight involved
with showing patients how they are agents in repetitively recreating prob-
lematic connections with others works hand-in-hand with the internaliza-
tion of the therapist as a different object and the therapist’s way of thinking
and observing interactions.
A critically important aspect of the working-through process involves
the therapist’s shift from a first-person perspective to a third-person per-
spective (Goldberg 1999). In other words, therapists must empathically
validate the patient’s “I” experience, the first-person perspective, while also
bringing to bear their own outside experience, the third-person perspec-
tive. By empathetically immersing oneself in the patient’s perspective, an
experience of being understood becomes part of the atmosphere of ther-
apy. Within that context, patients can begin to hear something about
themselves that at first seems alien because it is observed from outside
the patient. As Goldberg (1999) emphasizes, “The unconscious is expe-
rienced not as a first-person phenomenon but as something alien and
apart” (p. 357). Therefore part of the working-through process is that ther-
apists gradually provide interpretation, observation, and confrontation
from an outside or third-person perspective as a way of familiarizing
patients with their own unconscious life. Only gradually, through the
repetition of this point of view, will patients be able to own what is un-
conscious and what comes from a third-person perspective as part of
their own first-person perspective.
Promoting Mentalization
In more disturbed patients, particularly those whose personality is orga-
nized at a borderline level, the shift from an exclusively first-person per-
spective to a third-person point of view is accompanied by an increased
capacity for mentalization. Over time a patient recognizes that the ther-
apist is representing her in his own mind. As the therapist constructs and
reconstructs an image of the patient and the patient’s internal experi-


--- PAGE 172 ---
Working Through and Termination
157
ence, the patient herself will gradually start to view herself differently
and to recognize that her perception of the therapist and others is only a
representation, not an accurate replica of a pure form of external reality
(Fonagy 2001).
If the therapeutic alliance is strong, the therapist can more fully elab-
orate how his or her perspective differs from the patient’s, so the two can
openly discuss differences between the first-person and third-person per-
spectives. Part of the balance that is achieved is a sense of safety in a new
attachment relationship accompanied by a willingness to take risks and to
see things in new ways. Another dialectical tension created in long-term
dynamic therapy is acceptance versus expectation of change. Good ther-
apists convey to their patients that they are valued and accepted as they
are. At the same time, therapists acknowledge their patients’ suffering and
offer the potential to relieve that suffering by collaborating with them in
the discovery of new ways of relating to others.
In a working-through process that has the aim of promoting mental-
ization, a number of techniques are useful. The therapist may ask the pa-
tient to elaborate his fantasies about what is happening in the therapist’s
mind. When the patient draws a blank, the therapist may encourage the
patient to think more about the therapist’s internal world, with an em-
phasis on how the therapist represents a different subjectivity, or a differ-
ent “first person” entity, that may have some things in common with the
patient’s internal world but that also has many things that are different.
Another useful technique is to identify and focus on the patient’s men-
tal states. The therapist may observe that the patient appears angry, for
example, as a way of helping the patient discover herself in the therapist’s
eye. If the patient can own some of this anger, she may then see how a feel-
ing state may color her perception of others. A therapist might say, for
example, “I can see that when you’re feeling angry toward me, it’s hard
to imagine that I’m actually here to try to help you.” This type of com-
ment promotes mentalization in that patients must recognize that their
own emotional states create, in part, how they perceive others.
Ultimately, patients begin to see that the way they perceive reality in-
volves an internal representation that can be played with and understood
as having particular meanings. As they begin to recognize themselves,
they also recognize the therapist’s separate subjectivity and respect the
fact that the therapist’s internal world is different from their own.
When a patient acts impulsively on feelings, the therapist promotes
mentalization by helping the patient see that an affective state precipitated
the impulsive action; it did not simply come out of the blue. Following an
impulsive incident, a therapist might say, “What do you remember was
going on at the time the impulsive behavior started? What were you feel-


--- PAGE 173 ---
158
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
ing at the time? ”The patient might initially respond “I don’t know” or “I
don’t remember.” The therapist must not accept these answers as the end
point but should continue gently pushing the patient to think back on
what internal experience was present at the time.
Impasse
In the course of working through, many times therapists will feel that
they are at an impasse with a patient. Interpretations have been offered,
resistances have been confronted, and the patient’s first-person feelings
have been empathically validated. Observations from the therapist’s per-
spective have been systematically offered. Although the working-through
process has begun, the entire psychotherapy appears to be stuck. The pa-
tient does not appear to use the insights productively or to make changes
in behavior. The therapist may start to feel discouraged and may even
think that it might be time to give up.
A dynamic therapist is wise to remember that impasses or stalemates
may often simply reveal the heart of the transference-countertransfer-
ence work that needs to be examined (Gabbard 2000). One should not
anticipate that psychotherapy will go smoothly. Marcus Aurelius once
commented that the art of living is more like wrestling than dancing. The
same could be said for psychotherapy.
What might be most helpful at times when the therapy seems to be
stuck is to investigate the possibility that the patient’s transference and
the therapist’s countertransference have recreated the most powerful and
tenaciously defended internal object relationship of the patient. If that
can be openly discussed with the patient, progress may be possible.
Mr. V had been seeing Dr. W for about 9 months of therapy. He had come
with a lot of concerns about restoring himself to productive work and sat-
isfying relationships. After working successfully for a number of years, he
had been laid off, and he had been unable to find another job for a period
of 2 years. His wife had left him, and he found it hard to get mobilized
again. He was taking an antidepressant that had helped him with vegeta-
tive symptoms of depression, but he continued to find it difficult to
change his life in any productive way. He would repeatedly say to his
therapist, “Just tell me what to do to get better.” The therapist repeatedly
pointed out that the two of them would have to collaborate together to
figure out what would be most helpful.
Mr. V came to the sessions but always minimized any improvement
that might have taken place. He had made feeble efforts to find a job, but
repeatedly said that nothing was out there of interest to him. Dr. W
would try to get Mr. V to discuss some of the issues that made him feel dis-
couraged about his situation, but Mr. V would avoid talking about these is-


--- PAGE 174 ---
Working Through and Termination
159
sues and would go off on tangents about external events that seemed to
have very little relevance to the therapy. What was going on in the therapy
was parallel to the patient’s external life to a large extent. At one point,
Mr. V’s grown children arranged a birthday party for him. His sister and her
husband joined them at the party. Dr. W asked if it was a good party. He
replied, “It was nothing much.” He then went on to say how his sister and
her husband, as well as the two grown children, didn’t really go to that much
effort to help him.
He would frequently come to the sessions and say that nothing was
changing. When Dr. W would ask him how his job applications were go-
ing, he would reply, “I just haven’t gotten around to doing anything. I’ve
been quite discouraged about any prospect of productive work.” On one
particular occasion, Mr. V came to the session and began by saying, “I
can’t see where I’m doing well at all.” The therapist tried to offer some
encouragement by saying, “You’re now answering your phone when peo-
ple call, you cry much less, you’re starting an exercise program, you’re
seeing family members, and you’re sleeping a lot less during the day.” Mr.
V replied, “I’m really not exercising all that much, and I would say my
mood is still the same. I hate to tell you that, but it’s true.”
Dr. W recognized that she was unable to get past the impasse by em-
phasizing the positive observations she was making about Mr. V. At the
next session he began by saying, “I’m still depressed.” The therapist re-
sponded by saying, “Do you really think any of this treatment is doing you
any good?” He replied, “Very little.” Then Dr. W tried to put the stalemate
in perspective by offering an interpretation: “I’m starting to wonder, Mr. V,
if there is some kind of need deep within you to remain unsuccessful and
to thwart others who try to help you.” Mr. V was a bit startled by the in-
terpretation, but then surprisingly said, “I heard Dr. Phil on television say
something like that. I think there’s something to it.” Dr. W continued:
“What are you afraid will happen if you do allow yourself to get better or
be successful?” Mr. V thought for a moment and said, “I think I’m afraid
of being rejected if I try.” His therapist asked, “Has anyone rejected you
lately?” Then Mr. V began to cry and said that his brother had been very
upset with him, to the point where he told him, “I’m fed up with you and
can’t tolerate you anymore.” Dr. W then pointed out, “I think your ten-
dency to stay exactly as you are and thwart others’ efforts to help you re-
sults in your getting rejecting responses from others anyway.”
In this case, Mr. V’s “stuckness” involved anxieties about change. What
he started to see, with the help of his therapist, is that the impasse was re-
lated to aggression toward those who tried to help him. By digging in his
heels and resisting any type of change whatsoever, Mr. V was beginning to
make both his family members and this therapist feel fed up with him. By
pointing out his investment in remaining unsuccessful, Dr. W opened up
the problematic relational pattern to be examined by the two of them.
As the work continued with Mr. V, the therapist began to recognize
powerful motivations to stay the same. Being helped by others made Mr. V


--- PAGE 175 ---
160
Long-Term Psychodynamic Psychotherapy
feel small and inadequate. If Dr. W was able to help him, Mr. V felt en-
vious that the therapist had insights that he didn’t have. He felt he should
have thought of any interpretive understanding himself. To deal with his
envy, he had to spoil the help offered by his therapist and devalue that
help by saying he still did not feel any better.
This tendency to get worse with accurate and helpful interpretations
has been referred to as the negative therapeutic reaction. Freud first iden-
tified this effect when he found that some patients responded to accurate
insight by an exacerbation of their symptoms. A more contemporary def-
inition of the negative therapeutic reaction is that it applies to situations
where patients tend to get worse in the face of being helped by the ther-
apist. The reasons for negative therapeutic reactions are varied, and each
case must be carefully evaluated for the underlying motives.
In many cases, however, what is going on in the transference-counter-
transference dimensions of the treatment will reflect residuals from long-
standing patterns that started in childhood. Revenge fantasies are often
at the core of negative therapeutic reactions (Gabbard 2000). The ther-
apist has become a parent in the transference, and the patient derives tre-
mendous satisfaction from defeating the therapist’s efforts. In many cases,
one hears that the patient’s parents were terribly invested in the child’s
success and needed a child to succeed for the parents’ own narcissistic grat-
ification. Whether or not this depiction is completely accurate, the patient
believes it vehemently and is determined to fail as a way of thwarting the
parents’ expectations. From this perspective, failure may be equivalent to
success. Just as the patient wishes to deprive the parents of pleasure by
failing, he may also wish to deprive the therapist of taking pleasure in a
successful treatment. Often such a patient is terribly concerned that the
therapist will take credit for the patient’s success in the same way that the
patient’s parents took credit when the child succeeded in school or in ex-
tracurricular activities.
Patients who are entrenched in these dynamics may even postpone
substantial improvements until after therapy is terminated. They do not
want the therapist to become excited about any improvements made
during the therapy, so they postpone making real changes in their lives
until the therapist is no longer around. In that way, these patients imagine
a secret triumph in which only they derive gratification from the changes,
and the therapist does not. When such patients are encountered years af-
ter termination, they often surprise the therapist with how well they are
doing.
In this era of a two-person psychology, we would be naïve to assume
that these impasses involving revenge fantasies are completely one-sided.
Therapists often play a role in such negative therapeutic reactions. Our con-
